in the name of allah most gracious most merciful.
praise be to allah the cherisher and sustainer of the worlds
most gracious most merciful
master of the day of judgment.
thee do we worship and thine aid we seek.
show us the straight way
the way of those on whom thou hast bestowed thy grace those whose portion is not wrath and who go not astray.
a.l.m.
this is the book in it is guidance sure without doubt to those who fear allah
who believe in the unseen are steadfast in prayer and spend out of what we have provided for them
and who believe in the revelation sent to thee and sent before thy time and in their hearts have the assurance of the hereafter.
they are on true guidance from their lord and it is these who will prosper.
as to those who reject faith it is the same to them whether thou warn them or do not warn them they will not believe.
allah hath set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing and on their eyes is a veil great is the penalty they incur.
of the people there are some who say we believe in allah and the last day but they do not really believe.
fain would they deceive allah and those who believe but they only deceive themselves and realise it not
in their hearts is a disease and allah has increased their disease and grievous is the penalty they incur because they are false to themselves.
when it is said to them make not mischief on the earth they say why we only want to make peace
of a surety they are the ones who make mischief but they realise it not.
when it is said to them believe as the others believe they say shall we believe as the fools believe nay of a surety they are the fools but they do not know.
when they meet those who believe they say we believe but when they are alone with their evil ones they say we are really with you we were only jesting.
allah will throw back their mockery on them and give them rope in their trespasses so they will wander like blind ones to and fro.
these are they who have bartered guidance for error but their traffic is profitless and they have lost true direction
their similitude is that of a man who kindled a fire when it lighted all around him allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness. so they could not see.
deaf dumb and blind they will not return to the path.
or another similitude is that of a rainladen cloud from the sky in it are zones of darkness and thunder and lightning they press their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunderclap the while they are in terror of death. but allah is ever round the rejecters of faith
the lightning all but snatches away their sight every time the light helps them they walk therein and when the darkness grows on them they stand still. and if allah willed he could take away their faculty of hearing and seeing for allah hath power over all things.
o ye people adore your guardianlord who created you and those who came before you that ye may have the chance to learn righteousness
who has made the earth your couch and the heavens your canopy and sent down rain from the heavens and brought forth therewith fruits for your sustenance then set not up rivals unto allah when ye know the truth.
and if ye are in doubt as to what we have revealed from time to time to our servant then produce a sura like thereunto and call your witnesses or helpers if there are any besides allah if your doubts are true.
but if ye cannot and of a surety ye cannot then fear the fire whose fuel is men and stonesname
but give glad tidings to those who believe and work righteousness that their portion is gardens beneath which rivers flow. every time they are fed with fruits therefrom they say why this is what we were fed with before for they are given things in similitude and they have therein companions pure and holy and they abide therein for ever.
allah disdains not to use the similitude of things lowest as well as highest. those who believe know that it is truth from their lord but those who reject faith say what means allah by this similitude by it he causes many to stray and many he leads into the right path but he causes not to stray except those who forsake the path
those who break allahxbs covenant after it is ratified and who sunder what allah has ordered to be joined and do mischief on earth these cause loss only to themselves.
how can ye reject the faith in allah seeing that ye were without life and he gave you life then will he cause you to die and will again bring you to life and again to him will ye return.
it is he who hath created for you all things that are on earth moreover his design comprehended the heavens for he gave order and perfection to the seven firmaments and of all things he hath perfect knowledge.
behold thy lord said to the angels i will create a vicegerent on earth. they said wilt thou place therein one who will make mischief therein and shed blood whilst we do celebrate thy praises and glorify thy holy name he said i know what ye know not.
and he taught adam the names of all things then he placed them before the angels and said tell me the names of these if ye are right.
they said glory to thee of knowledge we have none save what thou hast taught us in truth it is thou who art perfect in knowledge and wisdom.
he said o adam tell them their names. when he had told them allah said did i not tell you that i know the secrets of heaven and earth and i know what ye reveal and what ye conceal
and behold we said to the angels bow down to adam and they bowed down. not so iblis he refused and was haughty he was of those who reject faith.
we said o adam dwell thou and thy wife in the garden and eat of the bountiful things therein as where and when ye will but approach not this tree or ye run into harm and transgression.
then did satan make them slip from the garden and get them out of the state of felicity in which they had been. we said get ye down all ye people with enmity between yourselves. on earth will be your dwellingplace and your means of livelihood  for a time.
then learnt adam from his lord words of inspiration and his lord turned towards him for he is oftreturning most merciful.
we said get ye down all from here and if as is sure there comes to you guidance from me whosoever follows my guidance on them shall be no fear nor shall they grieve.
but those who reject faith and belie our signs they shall be companions of the fire they shall abide therein.
o children of israel call to mind the special favour which i bestowed upon you and fulfil your covenant with me as i fulfil my covenant with you and fear none but me.
and believe in what i reveal confirming the revelation which is with you and be not the first to reject faith therein nor sell my signs for a small price and fear me and me alone.
and cover not truth with falsehood nor conceal the truth when ye know what it is.
and be steadfast in prayer practise regular charity and bow down your heads with those who bow down in worship.
do ye enjoin right conduct on the people and forget to practise it yourselves and yet ye study the scripture will ye not understand
nay seek allahxbs help with patient perseverance and prayer it is indeed hard except to those who bring a lowly spirit
who bear in mind the certainty that they are to meet their lord and that they are to return to him.
children of israel call to mind the special favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to all other for my message.
then guard yourselves against a day when one soul shall not avail another nor shall intercession be accepted for her nor shall compensation be taken from her nor shall anyone be helped from outside.
and remember we delivered you from the people of pharaoh they set you hard tasks and punishments slaughtered your sons and let your womenfolk live therein was a tremendous trial from your lord.
and remember we divided the sea for you and saved you and drowned pharaohxbs people within your very sight.
and remember we appointed forty nights for moses and in his absence ye took the calf for worship and ye did grievous wrong.
even then we did forgive you there was a chance for you to be grateful.
and remember we gave moses the scripture and the criterion between right and wrong there was a chance for you to be guided aright.
and remember moses said to his people o my people ye have indeed wronged yourselves by your worship of the calf so turn in repentance to your maker and slay yourselves the wrongdoers that will be better for you in the sight of your maker. then he turned towards you in forgiveness for he is oftreturning most merciful.
and remember ye said o moses we shall never believe in thee until we see allah manifestly but ye were dazed with thunder and lighting even as ye looked on.
then we raised you up after your death ye had the chance to be grateful.
and we gave you the shade of clouds and sent down to you manna and quails saying eat of the good things we have provided for you but they rebelled to us they did no harm but they harmed their own souls.
and remember we said enter this town and eat of the plenty therein as ye wish but enter the gate with humility in posture and in words and we shall forgive you your faults and increase the portion of those who do good.
but the transgressors changed the word from that which had been given them so we sent on the transgressors a plague from heaven for that they infringed our command repeatedly.
and remember moses prayed for water for his people we said strike the rock with thy staff. then gushed forth therefrom twelve springs. each group knew its own place for water. so eat and drink of the sustenance provided by allah and do no evil nor mischief on the face of the earth.
and remember ye said o moses we cannot endure one kind of food always so beseech thy lord for us to produce for us of what the earth groweth its potherbs and cucumbers its garlic lentils and onions. he said will ye exchange the better for the worse go ye down to any town and ye shall find what ye want they were covered with humiliation and misery they drew on themselves the wrath of allah. this because they went on rejecting the signs of allah and slaying his messengers without just cause. this because they rebelled and went on transgressing.
those who believe in the qurxban and those who follow the jewish scriptures and the christians and the sabiansname and work righteousness shall have their reward with their lord on them shall be no fear nor shall they grieve.
and remember we took your covenant and we raised above you the towering height of mount sinai  saying hold firmly to what we have given you and bring ever to remembrance what is therein perchance ye may fear allah.
but ye turned back thereafter had it not been for the grace and mercy of allah to you ye had surely been among the lost.
and well ye knew those amongst you who transgressed in the matter of the sabbath we said to them be ye apes despised and rejected.
so we made it an example to their own time and to their posterity and a lesson to those who fear allah.
and remember moses said to his people allah commands that ye sacrifice a heifer. they said makest thou a laughingstock of us he said allah save me from being an ignorant fool
they said beseech on our behalf thy lord to make plain to us what heifer it is he said he says the heifer should be neither too old nor too young but of middling age. now do what ye are commanded
they said beseech on our behalf thy lord to make plain to us her colour. he said he says a fawncoloured heifer pure and rich in tone the admiration of beholders
they said beseech on our behalf thy lord to make plain to us what she is to us are all heifers alike we wish indeed for guidance if allah wills.
he said he says a heifer not trained to till the soil or water the fields sound and without blemish. they said now hast thou brought the truth. then they offered her in sacrifice but not with goodwill.
remember ye slew a man and fell into a dispute among yourselves as to the crime but allah was to bring forth what ye did hide.
so we said strike the body with a piece of the heifer. thus allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you his signs perchance ye may understand.
thenceforth were your hearts hardened they became like a rock and even worse in hardness. for among rocks there are some from which rivers gush forth others there are which when split asunder send forth water and others which sink for fear of allah. and allah is not unmindful of what ye do.
can ye o ye men of faith entertain the hope that they will believe in you seeing that a party of them heard the word of allah and perverted it knowingly after they understood it.
behold when they meet the men of faith they say we believe but when they meet each other in private they say shall you tell them what allah hath revealed to you that they may engage you in argument about it before your lord do ye not understand their aim
know they not that allah knoweth what they conceal and what they reveal
and there are among them illiterates who know not the book but see therein their own desires and they do nothing but conjecture.
then woe to those who write the book with their own hands and then saythis is from allah to traffic with it for miserable price woe to them for what their hands do write and for the gain they make thereby.
and they say the fire shall not touch us but for a few numbered days say have ye taken a promise from allah for he never breaks his promise or is it that ye say of allah what ye do not know
nay those who seek gain in evil and are girt round by their sins they are companions of the fire therein shall they abide for ever.
but those who have faith and work righteousness they are companions of the garden therein shall they abide for ever.
and remember we took a covenant from the children of israel to this effect worship none but allah treat with kindness your parents and kindred and orphans and those in need speak fair to the people be steadfast in prayer and practise regular charity. then did ye turn back except a few among you and ye backslide even now.
and remember we took your covenant to this effect shed no blood amongst you nor turn out your own people from your homes and this ye solemnly ratified and to this ye can bear witness.
after this it is ye the same people who slay among yourselves and banish a party of you from their homes assist their enemies against them in guilt and rancour and if they come to you as captives ye ransom them though it was not lawful for you to banish them. then is it only a part of the book that ye believe in and do ye reject the rest but what is the reward for those among you who behave like this but disgrace in this life and on the day of judgment they shall be consigned to the most grievous penalty. for allah is not unmindful of what ye do.
these are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter their penalty shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped.
we gave moses the book and followed him up with a succession of messengers we gave jesus the son of mary clear signs and strengthened him with the holy spirit. is it that whenever there comes to you a messenger with what ye yourselves desire not ye are puffed up with pride some ye called impostors and others ye slay
they say our hearts are the wrappings which preserve allahxbs word we need no more. nay allahxbs curse is on them for their blasphemy little is it they believe.
and when there comes to them a book from allah confirming what is with themnamename they refuse to believe in it but the curse of allah is on those without faith.
miserable is the price for which they have sold their souls in that they deny the revelation which allah has sent down in insolent envy that allah of his grace should send it to any of his servants he pleases thus have they drawn on themselves wrath upon wrath. and humiliating is the punishment of those who reject faith.
when it is said to them believe in what allah hath sent down they say we believe in what was sent down to us yet they reject all besides even if it be truth confirming what is with them. say why then have ye slain the prophets of allah in times gone by if ye did indeed believe
there came to you moses with clear signs yet ye worshipped the calf even after that and ye did behave wrongfully.
and remember we took your covenant and we raised above you the towering height of mount sinai saying hold firmly to what we have given you and hearken to the law they said we hear and we disobey and they had to drink into their hearts of the taint of the calf because of their faithlessness. say vile indeed are the behests of your faith if ye have any faith
say if the last home with allah be for you specially and not for anyone else then seek ye for death if ye are sincere.
but they will never seek for death on account of the sins which their hands have sent on before them. and allah is wellacquainted with the wrongdoers.
thou wilt indeed find them of all people most greedy of lifename
say whoever is an enemy to gabrielfor he brings down the revelation to thy heart by allahxbs will a confirmation of what went before and guidance and glad tidings for those who believe
whoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and messengers to gabriel and michaelname
we have sent down to thee manifest signs ayat and none reject them but those who are perverse.
is it not the case that every time they make a covenant some party among them throw it aside nay most of them are faithless.
and when there came to them a messenger from allah confirming what was with them a party of the people of the book threw away the book of allah behind their backs as if it had been something they did not know
they followed what the evil ones gave out falsely against the power of solomon the blasphemers were not solomon but the evil ones teaching men magic and such things as came down at babylon to the angels harut and marut. but neither of these taught anyone such things without saying we are only for trial so do not blaspheme. they learned from them the means to sow discord between man and wife. but they could not thus harm anyone except by allahxbs permission. and they learned what harmed them not what profited them. and they knew that the buyers of magic would have no share in the happiness of the hereafter. and vile was the price for which they did sell their souls if they but knew
if they had kept their faith and guarded themselves from evil far better had been the reward from their lord if they but knew
o ye of faith say not to the messenger words of ambiguous import but words of respect and hearken to him to those without faith is a grievous punishment.
it is never the wish of those without faith among the people of the book nor of the pagans that anything good should come down to you from your lord. but allah will choose for his special mercy whom he will  for allah is lord of grace abounding.
none of our revelations do we abrogate or cause to be forgotten but we substitute something better or similar knowest thou not that allah hath power over all things
knowest thou not that to allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth and besides him ye have neither patron nor helper.
would ye question your messenger as moses was questioned of old but whoever changeth from faith to unbelief hath strayed without doubt from the even way.
quite a number of the people of the book wish they could turn you people back to infidelity after ye have believed from selfish envy after the truth hath become manifest unto them but forgive and overlook till allah accomplish his purpose for allah hath power over all things.
and be steadfast in prayer and regular in charity and whatever good ye send forth for your souls before you ye shall find it with allah for allah sees well all that ye do.
and they say none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian. those are their vain desires. say produce your proof if ye are truthful.
nayname he will get his reward with his lord on such shall be no fear nor shall they grieve.
the jews say the christians have naught to stand upon and the christians say the jews have naught to stand upon. yet they profess to study the same book. like unto their word is what those say who know not but allah will judge between them in their quarrel on the day of judgment.
and who is more unjust than he who forbids that in places for the worship of allah allahxbs name should be celebratedwhose zeal is in fact to ruin them it was not fitting that such should themselves enter them except in fear. for them there is nothing but disgrace in this world and in the world to come an exceeding torment.
to allah belong the east and the west whithersoever ye turn there is the presence of allah. for allah is allpervading allknowing.
they say allah hath begotten a son glory be to him.nay to him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth everything renders worship to him.
to him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth when he decreeth a matter he saith to it be and it is.
say those without knowledge why speaketh not allah unto us or why cometh not unto us a sign so said the people before them words of similar import. their hearts are alike. we have indeed made clear the signs unto any people who hold firmly to faith in their hearts.
verily we have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner but of thee no question shall be asked of the companions of the blazing fire.
never will the jews or the christians be satisfied with thee unless thou follow their form of religion. say the guidance of allahthat is the only guidance. wert thou to follow their desires after the knowledge which hath reached thee then wouldst thou find neither protector nor helper against allah.
those to whom we have sent the book study it as it should be studied they are the ones that believe therein those who reject faith thereinname
o children of israel call to mind the special favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to all others for my message.
then guard yourselves against aday when one soul shall not avail another nor shall compensation be accepted from her nor shall intercession profit her nor shall anyone be helped from outside.
and remember that abraham was tried by his lord with certain commands which he fulfilled he said i will make thee an imam to the nations. he pleaded and also imams from my offspring he answered but my promise is not within the reach of evildoers.
remember we made the house a place of assembly for men and a place of safety and take ye the station of abraham as a place of prayer and we covenanted with abraham and ismaxbil that they should sanctify my house for those who compass it round or use it as a retreat or bow or prostrate themselves therein in prayer.
and remember abraham said my lord make this a city of peace and feed its people with fruitssuch of them as believe in allah and the last day. he said yea and such as reject faithname but will soon drive them to the torment of fire an evil destination indeed
and remember abraham and ismaxbil raised the foundations of the house with this prayer our lord accept this service from us for thou art the allhearing the allknowing.
our lord make of us muslims bowing to thy will and of our progeny a people muslim bowing to thy will and show us our place for the celebration of due rites and turn unto us in mercy for thou art the oftreturning most merciful.
our lord send amongst them a messenger of their own who shall rehearse thy signs to them and instruct them in scripture and wisdom and sanctify them for thou art the exalted in might the wise.
and who turns away from the religion of abraham but such as debase their souls with folly him we chose and rendered pure in this world and he will be in the hereafter in the ranks of the righteous.
behold his lord said to him bow thy will to me he said i bow my will to the lord and cherisher of the universe.
and this was the legacy that abraham left to his sons and so did jacob oh my sons allah hath chosen the faith for you then die not except in the faith of islam.
were ye witnesses when death appeared before jacob behold he said to his sons what will ye worship after me they said we shall worship thy god and the god of thy fathers of abraham ismaxbil and isaac the one true allah to him we bow in islam.
that was a people that hath passed away. they shall reap the fruit of what they did and ye of what ye do of their merits there is no question in your case
they say become jews or christians if ye would be guided to salvation. say thou nay i would rather the religion of abraham the true and he joined not gods with allah.
say ye we believe in allah and the revelation given to us and to abraham ismaxbil isaac jacob and the tribes and that given to moses and jesus and that given to all prophets from their lord we make no difference between one and another of them and we bow to allah in islam.
so if they believe as ye believe they are indeed on the right path but if they turn back it is they who are in schism but allah will suffice thee as against them and he is the allhearing the allknowing.
our religion is the baptism of allah and who can baptize better than allah and it is he whom we worship.
say will ye dispute with us about allah seeing that he is our lord and your lord that we are responsible for our doings and ye for yours and that we are sincere in our faith in him
or do ye say that abraham ismaxbil isaac jacob and the tribes were jews or christians say do ye know better than allah ah who is more unjust than those who conceal the testimony they have from allah but allah is not unmindful of what ye do
that was a people that hath passed away. they shall reap the fruit of what they did and ye of what ye do of their merits there is no question in your case
the fools among the people will say what hath turned them from the qibla to which they were used say to allah belong both east and west he guideth whom he will to a way that is straight.
thus have we made of you an ummat justly balanced that ye might be witnesses over the nations and the messenger a witness over yourselves and we appointed the qibla to which thou wast used only to test those who followed the messenger from those who would turn on their heels from the faith. indeed it was a change momentous except to those guided by allah. and never would allah make your faith of no effect. for allah is to all people most surely full of kindness most merciful.
we see the turning of thy face for guidance to the heavens now shall we turn thee to a qibla that shall please thee. turn then thy face in the direction of the sacred mosque wherever ye are turn your faces in that direction. the people of the book know well that that is the truth from their lord. nor is allah unmindful of what they do.
even if thou wert to bring to the people of the book all the signs together they would not follow thy qibla nor art thou going to follow their qibla nor indeed will they follow each otherxbs qibla. if thou after the knowledge hath reached thee wert to follow their vain desiresname
the people of the book know this as they know their own sons but some of them conceal the truth which they themselves know.
the truth is from thy lord so be not at all in doubt.
to each is a goal to which allah turns him then strive together as in a race towards all that is good. wheresoever ye are allah will bring you together. for allah hath power over all things.
from whencesoever thou startest forth turn thy face in the direction of the sacred mosque that is indeed the truth from the lord. and allah is not unmindful of what ye do.
so from whencesoever thou startest forth turn thy face in the direction of the sacred mosque and wheresoever ye are turn your face thither that there be no ground of dispute against you among the people except those of them that are bent on wickedness so fear them not but fear me and that i may complete my favours on you and ye may consent to be guided
a similar favour have ye already received in that we have sent among you a messenger of your own rehearsing to you our signs and sanctifying you and instructing you in scripture and wisdom and in new knowledge.
then do ye remember me i will remember you. be grateful to me and reject not faith.
o ye who believe seek help with patient perseverance and prayer for allah is with those who patiently persevere.
and say not of those who are slain in the way of allah they are dead. nay they are living though ye perceive it not.
be sure we shall test you with something of fear and hunger some loss in goods or lives or the fruits of your toil but give glad tidings to those who patiently persevere
who say when afflicted with calamity to allah we belong and to him is our return
they are those on whom descend blessings from allah and mercy and they are the ones that receive guidance.
behold safa and marwa are among the symbols of allah. so if those who visit the house in the season or at other times should compass them round it is no sin in them. and if any one obeyeth his own impulse to goodname
those who conceal the clear signs we have sent down and the guidance after we have made it clear for the people in the bookname and the curse of those entitled to curse
except those who repent and make amends and openly declare the truth to them i turn for i am oftreturning most merciful.
those who reject faith and die rejectingname and the curse of angels and of all mankind
they will abide therein their penalty will not be lightened nor will respite be their lot.
and your allah is one allah there is no god but he most gracious most merciful.
behold in the creation of the heavens and the earth in the alternation of the night and the day in the sailing of the ships through the ocean for the profit of mankind in the rain which allah sends down from the skies and the life which he gives therewith to an earth that is dead in the beasts of all kinds that he scatters through the earth in the change of the winds and the clouds which they trail like their slaves between the sky and the earth here indeed are signs for a people that are wise.
yet there are men who take for worship others besides allah as equal with allah they love them as they should love allah. but those of faith are overflowing in their love for allah. if only the unrighteous could see behold they would see the penalty that to allah belongs all power and allah will strongly enforce the penalty.
then would those who are followed clear themselves of those who follow them  they would see the penalty and all relations between them would be cut off.
and those who followed would say if only we had one more chance we would clear ourselves of them as they have cleared themselves of us. thus will allah show them the fruits of their deeds as nothing but regrets. nor will there be a way for them out of the fire.
o ye people eat of what is on earth lawful and good and do not follow the footsteps of the evil one for he is to you an avowed enemy.
for he commands you what is evil and shameful and that ye should say of allah that of which ye have no knowledge.
when it is said to them follow what allah hath revealed they say nay we shall follow the ways of our fathers. what even though their fathers were void of wisdom and guidance
the parable of those who reject faith is as if one were to shout like a goatherd to things that listen to nothing but calls and cries deaf dumb and blind they are void of wisdom.
o ye who believe eat of the good things that we have provided for you and be grateful to allah if it is him ye worship.
he hath only forbidden you dead meat and blood and the flesh of swine and that on which any other name hath been invoked besides that of allah. but if one is forced by necessity without wilful disobedience nor transgressing due limitsname
those who conceal allahxbs revelations in the book and purchase for them a miserable profit they swallow into themselves naught but fire allah will not address them on the day of resurrection. nor purify them grievous will be their penalty.
they are the ones who buy error in place of guidance and torment in place of forgiveness. ah what boldness they show for the fire
their doom is because allah sent down the book in truth but those who seek causes of dispute in the book are in a schism far from the purpose.
it is not righteousness that ye turn your faces towards east or west but it is righteousness to believe in allah and the last day and the angels and the book and the messengers to spend of your substance out of love for him for your kin for orphans for the needy for the wayfarer for those who ask and for the ransom of slaves to be steadfast in prayer and practice regular charity to fulfil the contracts which ye have made and to be firm and patient in pain or suffering and adversity and throughout all periods of panic. such are the people of truth the allahfearing.
o ye who believe the law of equality is prescribed to you in cases of murder the free for the free the slave for the slave the woman for the woman. but if any remission is made by the brother of the slain then grant any reasonable demand and compensate him with handsome gratitude this is a concession and a mercy from your lord. after this whoever exceeds the limits shall be in grave penalty.
in the law of equality there is saving of life to you o ye men of understanding that ye may restrain yourselves.
it is prescribed when death approaches any of you if he leave any goods that he make a bequest to parents and next of kin according to reasonable usage this is due from the allahfearing.
if anyone changes the bequest after hearing it the guilt shall be on those who make the change. for allah hears and knows all things.
but if anyone fears partiality or wrongdoing on the part of the testator and makes peace between the parties concerned there is no wrong in him for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o ye who believe fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed to those before you that ye may learn selfrestraint
fasting for a fixed number of days but if any of you is ill or on a journey the prescribed number should be made up from days later. for those who can do it with hardship is a ransom the feeding of one that is indigent. but he that will give more of his own free willname if ye only knew.
ramadhan is the month in which was sent down the qurxban as a guide to mankind also clear signs for guidance and judgment between right and wrong. so every one of you who is present at his home during that month should spend it in fasting but if any one is ill or on a journey the prescribed period should be made up by days later. allah intends every facility for you he does not want to put to difficulties. he wants you to complete the prescribed period and to glorify him in that he has guided you and perchance ye shall be grateful.
when my servants ask thee concerning me i am indeed close to them i listen to the prayer of every suppliant when he calleth on me let them also with a will listen to my call and believe in me that they may walk in the right way.
permitted to you on the night of the fasts is the approach to your wives. they are your garments and ye are their garments. allah knoweth what ye used to do secretly among yourselves but he turned to you and forgave you so now associate with them and seek what allah hath ordained for you and eat and drink until the white thread of dawn appear to you distinct from its black thread then complete your fast till the night appears but do not associate with your wives while ye are in retreat in the mosques. those are limits set by allah approach not nigh thereto. thus doth allah make clear his signs to men that they may learn selfrestraint.
and do not eat up your property among yourselves for vanities nor use it as bait for the judges with intent that ye may eat up wrongfully and knowingly a little of other peoplexbs property.
they ask thee concerning the new moons. say they are but signs to mark fixed periods of time in the affairs of men and for pilgrimage. it is no virtue if ye enter your houses from the back it is virtue if ye fear allah. enter houses through the proper doors and fear allah that ye may prosper.
fight in the cause of allah those who fight you but do not transgress limits for allah loveth not transgressors.
and slay them wherever ye catch them and turn them out from where they have turned you out for tumult and oppression are worse than slaughter but fight them not at the sacred mosque unless they first fight you there but if they fight you slay them. such is the reward of those who suppress faith.
but if they cease allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
and fight them on until there is no more tumult or oppression and there prevail justice and faith in allah but if they cease let there be no hostility except to those who practise oppression.
the prohibited month for the prohibited monthnamename transgress ye likewise against him. but fear allah and know that allah is with those who restrain themselves.
and spend of your substance in the cause of allah and make not your own hands contribute to your destruction but do good for allah loveth those who do good.
and complete the hajj or xbumra in the service of allah. but if ye are prevented from completing it send an offering for sacrifice such as ye may find and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches the place of sacrifice. and if any of you is ill or has an ailment in his scalp necessitating shaving he should in compensation either fast or feed the poor or offer sacrifice and when ye are in peaceful conditions again if any one wishes to continue the xbumra on to the hajj he must make an offering such as he can afford but if he cannot afford it he should fast three days during the hajj and seven days on his return making ten days in all. this is for those whose household is not in the precincts of the sacred mosque. and fear allah and know that allah is strict in punishment.
for hajj are the months well known. if any one undertakes that duty therein let there be no obscenity nor wickedness nor wrangling in the hajj. and whatever good ye do be sure allah knoweth it. and take a provision with you for the journey but the best of provisions is right conduct. so fear me o ye that are wise.
it is no crime in you if ye seek of the bounty of your lord during pilgrimage. then when ye pour down from mount arafat celebrate the praises of allah at the sacred monument and celebrate his praises as he has directed you even though before this ye went astray.
then pass on at a quick pace from the place whence it is usual for the multitude so to do and ask for allahxbs forgiveness. for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
so when ye have accomplished your holy rites celebrate the praises of allah as ye used to celebrate the praises of your fathersname with far more heart and soul. there are men who say our lord give us thy bounties in this world but they will have no portion in the hereafter.
and there are men who say our lord give us good in this world and good in the hereafter and defend us from the torment of the fire
to these will be allotted what they have earned and allah is quick in account.
celebrate the praises of allah during the appointed days. but if any one hastens to leave in two days there is no blame on him and if any one stays on there is no blame on him if his aim is to do right. then fear allah and know that ye will surely be gathered unto him.
there is the type of man whose speech about this worldxbs life may dazzle thee and he calls allah to witness about what is in his heart yet is he the most contentious of enemies.
when he turns his back his aim everywhere is to spread mischief through the earth and destroy crops and cattle. but allah loveth not mischief.
when it is said to him fear allah he is led by arrogance to more crime. enough for him is hellan evil bed indeed to lie on
and there is the type of man who gives his life to earn the pleasure of allah and allah is full of kindness to his devotees.
o ye who believe enter into islam wholeheartedly and follow not the footsteps of the evil one for he is to you an avowed enemy.
if ye backslide after the clear signs have come to you then know that allah is exalted in power wise.
will they wait until allah comes to them in canopies of clouds with angels in his train and the question is thus settled but to allah do all questions go back for decision.
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have sent them. but if any one after allahxbs favour has come to him substitutes something else allah is strict in punishment.
the life of this world is alluring to those who reject faith and they scoff at those who believe. but the righteous will be above them on the day of resurrection for allah bestows his abundance without measure on whom he will.
mankind was one single nation and allah sent messengers with glad tidings and warnings and with them he sent the book in truth to judge between people in matters wherein they differed but the people of the book after the clear signs came to them did not differ among themselves except through selfish contumacy. allah by his grace guided the believers to the truth concerning that wherein they differed. for allah guided whom he will to a path that is straight.
or do ye think that ye shall enter the garden of bliss without such trials as came to those who passed away before you they encountered suffering and adversity and were so shaken in spirit that even the messenger and those of faith who were with him cried when will come the help of allah ah verily the help of allah is always near
they ask thee what they should spend in charity. say whatever ye spend that is good is for parents and kindred and orphans and those in want and for wayfarers. and whatever ye do that is good allah knoweth it well.
fighting is prescribed for you and ye dislike it. but it is possible that ye dislike a thing which is good for you and that ye love a thing which is bad for you. but allah knoweth and ye know not.
they ask thee concerning fighting in the prohibited month. say fighting therein is a grave offence but graver is it in the sight of allah to prevent access to the path of allah to deny him to prevent access to the sacred mosque and drive out its members. tumult and oppression are worse than slaughter. nor will they cease fighting you until they turn you back from your faith if they can. and if any of you turn back from their faith and die in unbelief their works will bear no fruit in this life and in the hereafter they will be companions of the fire and will abide therein.
those who believed and those who suffered exile and fought and strove and struggled in the path of allahname most merciful.
they ask thee concerning wine and gambling. say in them is great sin and some profit for men but the sin is greater than the profit. they ask thee how much they are to spend say what is beyond your needs. thus doth allah make clear to you his signs in order that ye may consider
their bearings on this life and the hereafter. they ask thee concerning orphans. say the best thing to do is what is for their good if ye mix their affairs with yours they are your brethren but allah knows the man who means mischief from the man who means good. and if allah had wished he could have put you into difficulties he is indeed exalted in power wise.
do not marry unbelieving women idolaters until they believe a slave woman who believes is better than an unbelieving woman even though she allures you. nor marry your girls to unbelievers until they believe a man slave who believes is better than an unbeliever even though he allures you. unbelievers do but beckon you to the fire. but allah beckons by his grace to the garden of bliss and forgiveness and makes his signs clear to mankind that they may celebrate his praise.
they ask thee concerning womenxbs courses. say they are a hurt and a pollution so keep away from women in their courses and do not approach them until they are clean. but when they have purified themselves ye may approach them in any manner time or place ordained for you by allah. for allah loves those who turn to him constantly and he loves those who keep themselves pure and clean.
your wives are as a tilth unto you so approach your tilth when or how ye will but do some good act for your souls beforehand and fear allah. and know that ye are to meet him in the hereafter and give these good tidings to those who believe.
and make not allahxbs name an excuse in your oaths against doing good or acting rightly or making peace between persons for allah is one who heareth and knoweth all things.
allah will not call you to account for thoughtlessness in your oaths but for the intention in your hearts and he is oftforgiving most forbearing.
for those who take an oath for abstention from their wives a waiting for four months is ordained if then they return allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
but if their intention is firm for divorce allah heareth and knoweth all things.
divorced women shall wait concerning themselves for three monthly periods. nor is it lawful for them to hide what allah hath created in their wombs if they have faith in allah and the last day. and their husbands have the better right to take them back in that period if they wish for reconciliation. and women shall have rights similar to the rights against them according to what is equitable but men have a degree of advantage over them. and allah is exalted in power wise.
a divorce is only permissible twice after that the parties should either hold together on equitable terms or separate with kindness. it is not lawful for you men to take back any of your gifts from your wives except when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by allah. if ye judges do indeed fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by allah there is no blame on either of them if she give something for her freedom. these are the limits ordained by allah so do not transgress them if any do transgress the limits ordained by allah such persons wrong themselves as well as others.
so if a husband divorces his wife irrevocably he cannot after that remarry her until after she has married another husband and he has divorced her. in that case there is no blame on either of them if they reunite provided they feel that they can keep the limits ordained by allah. such are the limits ordained by allah which he makes plain to those who understand.
when ye divorce women and they fulfil the term of their xbiddat either take them back on equitable terms or set them free on equitable terms but do not take them back to injure them or to take undue advantage if any one does that he wrongs his own soul. do not treat allahxbs signs as a jest but solemnly rehearse allahxbs favours on you and the fact that he sent down to you the book and wisdom for your instruction. and fear allah and know that allah is well acquainted with all things.
when ye divorce women and they fulfil the term of their xbiddat do not prevent them from marrying their former husbands if they mutually agree on equitable terms. this instruction is for all amongst you who believe in allah and the last day. that is the course making for most virtue and purity amongst you and allah knows and ye know not.
the mothers shall give such to their offspring for two whole years if the father desires to complete the term. but he shall bear the cost of their food and clothing on equitable terms. no soul shall have a burden laid on it greater than it can bear. no mother shall be treated unfairly on account of her child. nor father on account of his child an heir shall be chargeable in the same way. if they both decide on weaning by mutual consent and after due consultation there is no blame on them. if ye decide on a fostermother for your offspring there is no blame on you provided ye pay the mother what ye offered on equitable terms. but fear allah and know that allah sees well what ye do.
if any of you die and leave widows behind they shall wait concerning themselves four months and ten days when they have fulfilled their term there is no blame on you if they dispose of themselves in a just and reasonable manner. and allah is well acquainted with what ye do.
there is no blame on you if ye make an offer of betrothal or hold it in your hearts. allah knows that ye cherish them in your hearts but do not make a secret contract with them except in terms honourable nor resolve on the tie of marriage till the term prescribed is fulfilled. and know that allah knoweth what is in your hearts and take heed of him and know that allah is oftforgiving most forbearing.
there is no blame on you if ye divorce women before consummation or the fixation of their dower but bestow on them a suitable gift the wealthy according to his means and the poor according to his means a gift of a reasonable amount is due from those who wish to do the right thing.
and if ye divorce them before consummation but after the fixation of a dower for them then the half of the dower is due to them unless they remit it or the manxbs half is remitted by him in whose hands is the marriage tie and the remission of the manxbs half is the nearest to righteousness. and do not forget liberality between yourselves. for allah sees well all that ye do.
guard strictly your habit of prayers especially the middle prayer and stand before allah in a devout frame of mind.
if ye fear an enemy pray on foot or riding as may be most convenient but when ye are in security celebrate allahxbs praises in the manner he has taught you which ye knew not before.
those of you who die and leave widows should bequeath for their widows a yearxbs maintenance and residence but if they leave the residence there is no blame on you for what they do with themselves provided it is reasonable. and allah is exalted in power wise.
for divorced women maintenance should be provided on a reasonable scale. this is a duty on the righteous.
thus doth allah make clear his signs to you in order that ye may understand.
didst thou not turn by vision to those who abandoned their homes though they were thousands in number for fear of death allah said to them die then he restored them to life. for allah is full of bounty to mankind but most of them are ungrateful.
then fight in the cause of allah and know that allah heareth and knoweth all things.
who is he that will loan to allah a beautiful loan which allah will double unto his credit and multiply many times it is allah that giveth you want or plenty and to him shall be your return.
hast thou not turned thy vision to the chiefs of the children of israel after the time of moses they said to a prophet that was among them appoint for us a king that we may fight in the cause of allah. he said is it not possible if ye were commanded to fight that that ye will not fight they said how could we refuse to fight in the cause of allah seeing that we were turned out of our homes and our families but when they were commanded to fight they turned back except a small band among them. but allah has full knowledge of those who do wrong.
their prophet said to them allah hath appointed talut as king over you. they said how can he exercise authority over us when we are better fitted than he to exercise authority and he is not even gifted with wealth in abundance he said allah hath chosen him above you and hath gifted him abundantly with knowledge and bodily prowess allah granteth his authority to whom he pleaseth. allah careth for all and he knoweth all things.
and further their prophet said to them a sign of his authority is that there shall come to you the ark of the covenant with an assurance therein of security from your lord and the relics left by the family of moses and the family of aaron carried by angels. in this is a symbol for you if ye indeed have faith.
when talut set forth with the armies he said allah will test you at the stream if any drinks of its water he goes not with my army only those who taste not of it go with me a mere sip out of the hand is excused. but they all drank of it except a few. when they crossed the rivername they said this day we cannot cope with goliath and his forces. but those who were convinced that they must meet allah said how oft by allahxbs will hath a small force vanquished a big one allah is with those who steadfastly persevere.
when they advanced to meet goliath and his forces they prayed our lord pour out constancy on us and make our steps firm help us against those that reject faith.
by allahxbs will they routed them and david slew goliath and allah gave him power and wisdom and taught him whatever else he willed. and did not allah check one set of people by means of another the earth would indeed be full of mischief but allah is full of bounty to all the worlds.
these are the signs of allah we rehearse them to thee in truth verily thou art one of the messengers.
those messengers we endowed with gifts some above others to one of them allah spoke others he raised to degrees of honour to jesus the son of mary we gave clear signs and strengthened him with the holy spirit. if allah had so willed succeeding generations would not have fought among each other after clear signs had come to them but they chose to wrangle some believing and others rejecting. if allah had so willed they would not have fought each other but allah fulfilleth his plan.
o ye who believe spend out of the bounties we have provided for you before the day comes when no bargaining will avail nor friendship nor intercession. those who reject faith they are the wrongdoers.
allah there is no god but hename the selfsubsisting eternal. no slumber can seize him nor sleep. his are all things in the heavens and on earth. who is there can intercede in his presence except as he permitteth he knoweth what appeareth to his creatures as before or after or behind them. nor shall they compass aught of his knowledge except as he willeth. his throne doth extend over the heavens and the earth and he feeleth no fatigue in guarding and preserving them for he is the most high the supreme in glory.
let there be no compulsion in religion truth stands out clear from error whoever rejects evil and believes in allah hath grasped the most trustworthy handhold that never breaks. and allah heareth and knoweth all things.
allah is the protector of those who have faith from the depths of darkness he will lead them forth into light. of those who reject faith the patrons are the evil ones from light they will lead them forth into the depths of darkness. they will be companions of the fire to dwell therein for ever.
hast thou not turned thy vision to one who disputed with abraham about his lord because allah had granted him power abraham said my lord is he who giveth life and death. he said i give life and death. said abraham but it is allah that causeth the sun to rise from the east do thou then cause him to rise from the west. thus was he confounded who in arrogance rejected faith. nor doth allah give guidance to a people unjust.
or take the similitude of one who passed by a hamlet all in ruins to its roofs. he said oh how shall allah bring it ever to life after this its death but allah caused him to die for a hundred years then raised him up again. he said how long didst thou tarry thus he said perhaps a day or part of a day. he said nay thou hast tarried thus a hundred years but look at thy food and thy drink they show no signs of age and look at thy donkey and that we may make of thee a sign unto the people look further at the bones how we bring them together and clothe them with flesh. when this was shown clearly to him he said i know that allah hath power over all things.
when abraham said show me lord how you will raise the dead  he replied have you no faith he said yes but just to reassure my heart. allah said take four birds draw them to you and cut their bodies to pieces. scatter them over the mountaintops then call them back. they will come swiftly to you. know that allah is mighty wise.
the parable of those who spend their substance in the way of allah is that of a grain of corn it groweth seven ears and each ear hath a hundred grains. allah giveth manifold increase to whom he pleaseth and allah careth for all and he knoweth all things.
those who spend their substance in the cause of allah and follow not up their gifts with reminders of their generosity or with injuryname nor shall they grieve.
kind words and the covering of faults are better than charity followed by injury. allah is free of all wants and he is mostforbearing.
o ye who believe cancel not your charity by reminders of your generosity or by injuryname but believe neither in allah nor in the last day. they are in parable like a hard barren rock on which is a little soil on it falls heavy rain which leaves it just a bare stone. they will be able to do nothing with aught they have earned. and allah guideth not those who reject faith.
and the likeness of those who spend their substance seeking to please allah and to strengthen their souls is as a garden high and fertile heavy rain falls on it but makes it yield a double increase of harvest and if it receives not heavy rain light moisture sufficeth it. allah seeth well whatever ye do.
does any of you wish that he should have a garden with datepalms and vines and streams flowing underneath and all kinds of fruit while he is stricken with old age and his children are not strong enough to look after themselves that it should be caught in a whirlwind with fire therein and be burnt up thus doth allah make clear to you his signs that ye may consider.
o ye who believe give of the good things which ye have honourably earned and of the fruits of the earth which we have produced for you and do not even aim at getting anything which is bad in order that out of it ye may give away something when ye yourselves would not receive it except with closed eyes. and know that allah is free of all wants and worthy of all praise.
the evil one threatens you with poverty and bids you to conduct unseemly. allah promiseth you his forgiveness and bounties. and allah careth for all and he knoweth all things.
he granteth wisdom to whom he pleaseth and he to whom wisdom is granted receiveth indeed a benefit overflowing but none will grasp the message but men of understanding.
and whatever ye spend in charity or devotion be sure allah knows it all. but the wrongdoers have no helpers.
if ye disclose acts of charity even so it is well but if ye conceal them and make them reach those really in need that is best for you it will remove from you some of your stains of evil. and allah is well acquainted with what ye do.
it is not required of thee o messenger to set them on the right path but allah sets on the right path whom he pleaseth. whatever of good ye give benefits your own souls and ye shall only do so seeking the face of allah. whatever good ye give shall be rendered back to you and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly.
charity is for those in need who in allahxbs cause are restricted from travel and cannot move about in the land seeking for trade or work the ignorant man thinks because of their modesty that they are free from want. thou shalt know them by their unfailing mark they beg not importunately from all the sundry. and whatever of good ye give be assured allah knoweth it well.
those who in charity spend of their goods by night and by day in secret and in public have their reward with their lord on them shall be no fear nor shall they grieve.
those who devour usury will not stand except as stand one whom the evil one by his touch hath driven to madness. that is because they say trade is like usury but allah hath permitted trade and forbidden usury. those who after receiving direction from their lord desist shall be pardoned for the past their case is for allah to judge but those who repeat the offence are companions of the fire they will abide therein for ever.
allah will deprive usury of all blessing but will give increase for deeds of charity for he loveth not creatures ungrateful and wicked.
those who believe and do deeds of righteousness and establish regular prayers and regular charity will have their reward with their lord on them shall be no fear nor shall they grieve.
o ye who believe fear allah and give up what remains of your demand for usury if ye are indeed believers.
if ye do it not take notice of war from allah and his messenger but if ye turn back ye shall have your capital sums deal not unjustly and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly.
if the debtor is in a difficulty grant him time till it is easy for him to repay. but if ye remit it by way of charity that is best for you if ye only knew.
and fear the day when ye shall be brought back to allah. then shall every soul be paid what it earned and none shall be dealt with unjustly.
o ye who believe when ye deal with each other in transactions involving future obligations in a fixed period of time reduce them to writing let a scribe write down faithfully as between the parties let not the scribe refuse to write as allah has taught him so let him write. let him who incurs the liability dictate but let him fear his lord allah and not diminish aught of what he owes. if they party liable is mentally deficient or weak or unable himself to dictate let his guardian dictate faithfully and get two witnesses out of your own men and if there are not two men then a man and two women such as ye choose for witnesses so that if one of them errs the other can remind her. the witnesses should not refuse when they are called on for evidence. disdain not to reduce to writing your contract for a future period whether it be small or big it is juster in the sight of allah more suitable as evidence and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves but if it be a transaction which ye carry out on the spot among yourselves there is no blame on you if ye reduce it not to writing. but take witness whenever ye make a commercial contract and let neither scribe nor witness suffer harm. if ye do such harm it would be wickedness in you. so fear allah for it is good that teaches you. and allah is well acquainted with all things. if ye are on a journey and cannot find a scribe a pledge with possession may serve the purpose. and if one of you deposits a thing on trust with another let the trustee faithfully discharge his trust and let him fear his lord conceal not evidence for whoever conceals it  his heart is tainted with sin. and allah knoweth all that ye do.
if ye are on a journey and cannot find a scribe a pledge with possession may serve the purpose. and if one of you deposits a thing on trust with another let the trustee faithfully discharge his trust and let him fear his lord. conceal not evidence for whoever conceals it his heart is tainted with sin. and allah knoweth all that ye do.
to allah belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth. whether ye show what is in your minds or conceal it allah calleth you to account for it. he forgiveth whom he pleaseth and punisheth whom he pleaseth for allah hath power over all things.
the messenger believeth in what hath been revealed to him from his lord as do the men of faith. each one of them believeth in allah his angels his books and his messengers. we make no distinction they say between one and another of his messengers. and they say we hear and we obey we seek thy forgiveness our lord and to thee is the end of all journeys.
on no soul doth allah place a burden greater than it can bear. it gets every good that it earns and it suffers every ill that it earns. pray our lord condemn us not if we forget or fall into error our lord lay not on us a burden like that which thou didst lay on those before us our lord lay not on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear. blot out our sins and grant us forgiveness. have mercy on us. thou art our protector help us against those who stand against faith.
a. l. m.
allah there is no god but hename the selfsubsisting eternal.
it is he who sent down to thee step by step in truth the book confirming what went before it and he sent down the law of moses and the gospel of jesus before this as a guide to mankind and he sent down the criterion of judgment between right and wrong.
then those who reject faith in the signs of allah will suffer the severest penalty and allah is exalted in might lord of retribution.
from allah verily nothing is hidden on earth or in the heavens.
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he pleases. there is no god but he the exalted in might the wise.
he it is who has sent down to thee the book in it are verses basic or fundamental of established meaning they are the foundation of the book others are allegorical. but those in whose hearts is perversity follow the part thereof that is allegorical seeking discord and searching for its hidden meanings but no one knows its hidden meanings except allah. and those who are firmly grounded in knowledge say we believe in the book the whole of it is from our lord and none will grasp the message except men of understanding.
our lord they say let not our hearts deviate now after thou hast guided us but grant us mercy from thine own presence for thou art the grantor of bounties without measure.
our lord thou art he that will gather mankind together against a day about which there is no doubt for allah never fails in his promise.
those who reject faithname
their plight will be no better than that of the people of pharaoh and their predecessors they denied our signs and allah called them to account for their sins. for allah is strict in punishment.
say to those who reject faith soon will ye be vanquished and gathered together to hellan evil bed indeed to lie on
there has already been for you a sign in the two armies that met in combat one was fighting in the cause of allah the other resisting allah these saw with their own eyes twice their number. but allah doth support with his aid whom he pleaseth. in this is a warning for such as have eyes to see.
fair in the eyes of men is the love of things they covet women and sons heapedup hoards of gold and silver horses branded for blood and excellence and wealth of cattle and welltilled land. such are the possessions of this worldxbs life but in nearness to allah is the best of the goals to return to.
say shall i give you glad tidings of things far better than those for the righteous are gardens in nearness to their lord with rivers flowing beneath therein is their eternal home with companions pure and holy and the good pleasure of allah. for in allahxbs sight are all his servants
namely those who say our lord we have indeed believed forgive us then our sins and save us from the agony of the fire
those who show patience firmness and selfcontrol who are true in word and deed who worship devoutly who spend in the way of allah and who pray for forgiveness in the early hours of the morning.
there is no god but he that is the witness of allah his angels and those endued with knowledge standing firm on justice. there is no god but he the exalted in power the wise.
the religion before allah is islam submission to his will nor did the people of the book dissent therefrom except through envy of each other after knowledge had come to them. but if any deny the signs of allah allah is swift in calling to account.
so if they dispute with thee say i have submitted my whole self to allah and so have those who follow me. and say to the people of the book and to those who are unlearned do ye also submit yourselves if they do they are in right guidance but if they turn back thy duty is to convey the message and in allahxbs sight are all his servants.
as to those who deny the signs of allah and in defiance of right slay the prophets and slay those who teach just dealing with mankind announce to them a grievous penalty.
they are those whose works will bear no fruit in this world and in the hereafter nor will they have anyone to help.
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who have been given a portion of the book they are invited to the book of allah to settle their dispute but a party of them turn back and decline the arbitration.
this because they say the fire shall not touch us but for a few numbered days for their forgeries deceive them as to their own religion.
but how will they fare when we gather them together against a day about which there is no doubt and each soul will be paid out just what it has earned without favour or injustice
say o allah lord of power and rule thou givest power to whom thou pleasest and thou strippest off power from whom thou pleasest thou enduest with honour whom thou pleasest and thou bringest low whom thou pleasest in thy hand is all good. verily over all things thou hast power.
thou causest the night to gain on the day and thou causest the day to gain on the night thou bringest the living out of the dead and thou bringest the dead out of the living and thou givest sustenance to whom thou pleasest without measure.
let not the believers take for friends or helpers unbelievers rather than believers if any do that in nothing will there be help from allah except by way of precaution that ye may guard yourselves from them. but allah cautions you to remember himself for the final goal is to allah.
say whether ye hide what is in your hearts or reveal it allah knows it all he knows what is in the heavens and what is on earth. and allah has power over all things.
on the day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it has done and all the evil it has done it will wish there were a great distance between it and its evil. but allah cautions you to remember himself. and allah is full of kindness to those that serve him.
say if ye do love allah follow me allah will love you and forgive you your sins for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
say obey allah and his messenger but if they turn back allah loveth not those who reject faith.
allah did choose adam and noah the family of abraham and the family of xbimran above all people
offspring one of the other and allah heareth and knoweth all things.
behold a woman of xbimran said o my lord i do dedicate unto thee what is in my womb for thy special service so accept this of me for thou hearest and knowest all things.
when she was delivered she said o my lord behold i am delivered of a female child and allah knew best what she brought forth and no wise is the male like the female. i have named her mary and i commend her and her offspring to thy protection from the evil one the rejected.
right graciously did her lord accept her he made her grow in purity and beauty to the care of zakariya was she assigned. every time that he entered her chamber to see her he found her supplied with sustenance. he said o mary whence comes this to you she said from allah for allah provides sustenance to whom he pleases without measure.
there did zakariya pray to his lord saying o my lord grant unto me from thee a progeny that is pure for thou art he that heareth prayer
while he was standing in prayer in the chamber the angels called unto him allah doth give thee glad tidings of yahya witnessing the truth of a word from allah and be besides noble chaste and a prophet of the goodly company of the righteous.
he said o my lord how shall i have son seeing i am very old and my wife is barren thus was the answer doth allah accomplish what he willeth.
he said o my lord give me a sign thy sign was the answer shall be that thou shalt speak to no man for three days but with signals. then celebrate the praises of thy lord again and again and glorify him in the evening and in the morning.
behold the angels said o mary allah hath chosen thee and purified thee chosen thee above the women of all nations.
o mary worship thy lord devoutly prostrate thyself and bow down in prayer with those who bow down.
this is part of the tidings of the things unseen which we reveal unto thee o messenger by inspiration thou wast not with them when they cast lots with arrows as to which of them should be charged with the care of mary nor wast thou with them when they disputed the point.
behold the angels said o mary allah giveth thee glad tidings of a word from him his name will be christ jesus the son of mary held in honour in this world and the hereafter and of the company of those nearest to allah
he shall speak to the people in childhood and in maturity. and he shall be of the company of the righteous.
she said o my lord how shall i have a son when no man hath touched me he said even so allah createth what he willeth when he hath decreed a plan he but saith to it xbbexb and it is
and allah will teach him the book and wisdom the law and the gospel
and appoint him a messenger to the children of israel with this message xbi have come to you with a sign from your lord in that i make for you out of clay as it were the figure of a bird and breathe into it and it becomes a bird by allahxbs leave and i heal those born blind and the lepers and i quicken the dead by allahxbs leave and i declare to you what ye eat and what ye store in your houses. surely therein is a sign for you if ye did believe
xbi have come to you to attest the law which was before me. and to make lawful to you part of what was before forbidden to you i have come to you with a sign from your lord. so fear allah and obey me.
xbit is allah who is my lord and your lord then worship him. this is a way that is straight.xb
when jesus found unbelief on their part he said who will be my helpers to the work of allah said the disciples we are allahxbs helpers we believe in allah and do thou bear witness that we are muslims.
our lord we believe in what thou hast revealed and we follow the messenger then write us down among those who bear witness.
and the unbelievers plotted and planned and allah too planned and the best of planners is allah.
behold allah said o jesus i will take thee and raise thee to myself and clear thee of the falsehoods of those who blaspheme i will make those who follow thee superior to those who reject faith to the day of resurrection then shall ye all return unto me and i will judge between you of the matters wherein ye dispute.
as to those who reject faith i will punish them with terrible agony in this world and in the hereafter nor will they have anyone to help.
as to those who believe and work righteousness allah will pay them in full their reward but allah loveth not those who do wrong.
this is what we rehearse unto thee of the signs and the message of wisdom.
the similitude of jesus before allah is as that of adam he created him from dust then said to him be. and he was.
the truth comes from allah alone so be not of those who doubt.
if any one disputes in this matter with thee now after full knowledge hath come to thee say come let us gather togethername our women and your women ourselves and yourselves then let us earnestly pray and invoke the curse of allah on those who lie
this is the true account there is no god except allah and allahhe is indeed the exalted in power the wise.
but if they turn back allah hath full knowledge of those who do mischief.
say o people of the book come to common terms as between us and you that we worship none but allah that we associate no partners with him that we erect not from among ourselves lords and patrons other than allah. if then they turn back say ye bear witness that we at least are muslims bowing to allahxbs will.
ye people of the book why dispute ye about abraham when the law and the gospel were not revealed till after him have ye no understanding
ah ye are those who fell to disputing even in matters of which ye had some knowledge but why dispute ye in matters of which ye have no knowledge it is allah who knows and ye who know not
abraham was not a jew nor yet a christian but he was true in faith and bowed his will to allahxbs which is islam and he joined not gods with allah.
without doubt among men the nearest of kin to abraham are those who follow him as are also this prophet and those who believe and allah is the protector of those who have faith.
it is the wish of a section of the people of the book to lead you astray. but they shall lead astray not you but themselves and they do not perceive
ye people of the book why reject ye the signs of allah of which ye are yourselves witnesses
ye people of the book why do ye clothe truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while ye have knowledge
a section of the people of the book say believe in the morning what is revealed to the believers but reject it at the end of the day perchance they may themselves turn back
and believe no one unless he follows your religion. say true guidance is the guidance of allah fear ye lest a revelation be sent to someone else like unto that which was sent unto you or that those receiving such revelation should engage you in argument before your lord say all bounties are in the hand of allah he granteth them to whom he pleaseth and allah careth for all and he knoweth all things.
for his mercy he specially chooseth whom he pleaseth for allah is the lord of bounties unbounded.
among the people of the book are some who if entrusted with a hoard of gold will readily pay it back others who if entrusted with a single silver coin will not repay it unless thou constantly stoodest demanding because they say there is no call on us to keep faith with these ignorant pagans. but they tell a lie against allah and well they know it.
nay. those that keep their plighted faith and act arightname
as for those who sell the faith they owe to allah and their own plighted word for a small price they shall have no portion in the hereafter nor will allah deign to speak to them or look at them on the day of judgment nor will he cleans them of sin they shall have a grievous penalty.
there is among them a section who distort the book with their tongues as they read you would think it is a part of the book but it is no part of the book and they say that is from allah but it is not from allah it is they who tell a lie against allah and well they know it
it is not possible that a man to whom is given the book and wisdom and the prophetic office should say to people be ye my worshippers rather than allahxbs on the contrary he would say be ye worshippers of him who is truly the cherisher of all for ye have taught the book and ye have studied it earnestly.
nor would he instruct you to take angels and prophets for lords and patrons. what would he bid you to unbelief after ye have bowed your will to allah in islam
behold allah took the covenant of the prophets saying i give you a book and wisdom then comes to you a messenger confirming what is with you do ye believe in him and render him help. allah said do ye agree and take this my covenant as binding on you they said we agree. he said then bear witness and i am with you among the witnesses.
if any turn back after this they are perverted transgressors.
do they seek for other than the religion of allahwhile all creatures in the heavens and on earth have willing or unwilling bowed to his will accepted islam and to him shall they all be brought back.
say we believe in allah and in what has been revealed to us and what was revealed to abraham ismaxbil isaac jacob and the tribes and in the books given to moses jesus and the prophets from their lord we make no distinction between one and another among them and to allah do we bow our will in islam.
if anyone desires a religion other than islam submission to allah never will it be accepted of him and in the hereafter he will be in the ranks of those who have lost all spiritual good.
how shall allah guide those who reject faith after they accepted it and bore witness that the messenger was true and that clear signs had come unto them but allah guides not a people unjust.
of such the reward is that on them rests the curse of allah of his angels and of all mankind
in that will they dwell nor will their penalty be lightened nor respite be their lot
except for those that repent even after that and make amends for verily allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
but those who reject faith after they accepted it and then go on adding to their defiance of faith never will their repentance be accepted for they are those who have of set purpose gone astray.
as to those who reject faith and die rejectingname though they should offer it for ransom. for such is in store a penalty grievous and they will find no helpers.
by no means shall ye attain righteousness unless ye give freely of that which ye love and whatever ye give of a truth allah knoweth it well.
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel made unlawful for itself before the law of moses was revealed. say bring ye the law and study it if ye be men of truth.
if any after this invent a lie and attribute it to allah they are indeed unjust wrongdoers.
say allah speaketh the truth follow the religion of abraham the sane in faith he was not of the pagans.
the first house of worship appointed for men was that at bakka full of blessing and of guidance for all kinds of beings
in it are signs manifest for example the station of abraham whoever enters it attains security pilgrimage thereto is a duty men owe to allah those who can afford the journey but if any deny faith allah stands not in need of any of his creatures.
say o people of the book why reject ye the signs of allah when allah is himself witness to all ye do
say o ye people of the book why obstruct ye those who believe from the path of allah seeking to make it crooked while ye were yourselves witnesses to allahxbs covenant but allah is not unmindful of all that ye do.
o ye who believe if ye listen to a faction among the people of the book they would indeed render you apostates after ye have believed
and how would ye deny faith while unto you are rehearsed the signs of allah and among you lives the messenger whoever holds firmly to allah will be shown a way that is straight.
o ye who believe fear allah as he should be feared and die not except in a state of islam.
and hold fast all together by the rope which allah stretches out for you and be not divided among yourselves and remember with gratitude allahxbs favour on you for ye were enemies and he joined your hearts in love so that by his grace ye became brethren and ye were on the brink of the pit of fire and he saved you from it. thus doth allah make his signs clear to you that ye may be guided.
let there arise out of you a band of people inviting to all that is good enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong they are the ones to attain felicity.
be not like those who are divided amongst themselves and fall into disputations after receiving clear signs for them is a dreadful penalty
on the day when some faces will be lit up with white and some faces will be in the gloom of black to those whose faces will be black will be said did ye reject faith after accepting it taste then the penalty for rejecting faith.
but those whose faces will be lit with white they will be in the light of allahxbs mercy therein to dwell for ever.
these are the signs of allah we rehearse them to thee in truth and allah means no injustice to any of his creatures.
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth to him do all questions go back for decision.
ye are the best of peoples evolved for mankind enjoining what is right forbidding what is wrong and believing in allah. if only the people of the book had faith it were best for them among them are some who have faith but most of them are perverted transgressors.
they will do you no harm barring a trifling annoyance if they come out to fight you they will show you their backs and no help shall they get.
shame is pitched over them like a tent wherever they are found except when under a covenant of protection from allah and from men they draw on themselves wrath from allah and pitched over them is the tent of destitution. this because they rejected the signs of allah and slew the prophets in defiance of right this because they rebelled and transgressed beyond bounds.
not all of them are alike of the people of the book are a portion that stand for the right they rehearse the signs of allah all night long and they prostrate themselves in adoration.
they believe in allah and the last day they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and they hasten in emulation in all good works they are in the ranks of the righteous.
of the good that they do nothing will be rejected of them for allah knoweth well those that do right.
those who reject faithnamedwelling therein for ever.
what they spend in the life of this material world may be likened to a wind which brings a nipping frost it strikes and destroys the harvest of men who have wronged their own souls it is not allah that hath wronged them but they wrong themselves.
o ye who believe take not into your intimacy those outside your ranks they will not fail to corrupt you. they only desire your ruin rank hatred has already appeared from their mouths what their hearts conceal is far worse. we have made plain to you the signs if ye have wisdom.
ah ye are those who love them but they love you notname they say we believe but when they are alone they bite off the very tips of their fingers at you in their rage. say perish in you rage allah knoweth well all the secrets of the heart.
if aught that is good befalls you it grieves them but if some misfortune overtakes you they rejoice at it. but if ye are constant and do right not the least harm will their cunning do to you for allah compasseth round about all that they do.
remember that morning thou didst leave thy household early to post the faithful at their stations for battle and allah heareth and knoweth all things
remember two of your parties meditated cowardice but allah was their protector and in allah should the faithful ever put their trust.
allah had helped you at badr when ye were a contemptible little force then fear allah thus may ye show your gratitude.
remember thou saidst to the faithful is it not enough for you that allah should help you with three thousand angels specially sent down
yea  if ye remain firm and act aright even if the enemy should rush here on you in hot haste your lord would help you with five thousand angels making a terrific onslaught.
allah made it but a message of hope for you and an assurance to your hearts in any case there is no help except from allah. the exalted the wise
that he might cut off a fringe of the unbelievers or expose them to infamy and they should then be turned back frustrated of their purpose.
not for thee but for allah is the decision whether he turn in mercy to them or punish them for they are indeed wrongdoers.
to allah belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth. he forgiveth whom he pleaseth and punisheth whom he pleaseth but allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o ye who believe devour not usury doubled and multiplied but fear allah that ye may really prosper.
fear the fire which is repaired for those who reject faith
and obey allah and the messenger that ye may obtain mercy.
be quick in the race for forgiveness from your lord and for a garden whose width is that of the whole of the heavens and of the earth prepared for the righteous
those who spend freely whether in prosperity or in adversity who restrain anger and pardon all men for allah loves those who do good
and those who having done something to be ashamed of or wronged their own souls earnestly bring allah to mind and ask for forgiveness for their sinsname
for such the reward is forgiveness from their lord and gardens with rivers flowing underneath an eternal dwelling how excellent a recompense for those who work and strive
many were the ways of life that have passed away before you travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who rejected truth.
here is a plain statement to men a guidance and instruction to those who fear allah
so lose not heart nor fall into despair for ye must gain mastery if ye are true in faith.
if a wound hath touched you be sure a similar wound hath touched the others. such days of varying fortunes we give to men and men by turns that allah may know those that believe and that he may take to himself from your ranks martyrwitnesses to truth. and allah loveth not those that do wrong.
allahxbs object also is to purge those that are true in faith and to deprive of blessing those that resist faith.
did ye think that ye would enter heaven without allah testing those of you who fought hard in his cause and remained steadfast
ye did indeed wish for death before ye met him now ye have seen him with your own eyes and ye flinch
muhammad is no more than a messenger many were the messenger that passed away before him. if he died or were slain will ye then turn back on your heels if any did turn back on his heels not the least harm will he do to allah but allah on the other hand will swiftly reward those who serve him with gratitude.
nor can a soul die except by allahxbs leave the term being fixed as by writing. if any do desire a reward in this life we shall give it to him and if any do desire a reward in the hereafter we shall give it to him. and swiftly shall we reward those that serve us with gratitude.
how many of the prophets fought in allahxbs way and with them fought large bands of godly men but they never lost heart if they met with disaster in allahxbs way nor did they weaken in will nor give in. and allah loves those who are firm and steadfast.
all that they said was our lord forgive us our sins and anything we may have done that transgressed our duty establish our feet firmly and help us against those that resist faith.
and allah gave them a reward in this world and the excellent reward of the hereafter. for allah loveth those who do good.
o ye who believe if ye obey the unbelievers they will drive you back on your heels and ye will turn back from faith to your own loss.
nay allah is your protector and he is the best of helpers.
soon shall we cast terror into the hearts of the unbelievers for that they joined companions with allah for which he had sent no authority their abode will be the fire and evil is the home of the wrongdoers
allah did indeed fulfil his promise to you when ye with his permission were about to annihilate your enemyname and disobeyed it after he brought you in sight of the booty which ye covet. among you are some that hanker after this world and some that desire the hereafter. then did he divert you from your foes in order to test you but he forgave you for allah is full of grace to those who believe.
behold ye were climbing up the high ground without even casting a side glance at any one and the messenger in your rear was calling you back. there did allah give you one distress after another by way of requital to teach you not to grieve for the booty that had escaped you and for the ill that had befallen you. for allah is well aware of all that ye do.
after the excitement of the distress he sent down calm on a band of you overcome with slumber while another band was stirred to anxiety by their own feelings moved by wrong suspicions of allahsuspicions due to ignorance. they said what affair is this of ours say thou indeed this affair is wholly allahxbs. they hide in their minds what they dare not reveal to thee. they say to themselves if we had had anything to do with this affair we should not have been in the slaughter here. say even if you had remained in your homes those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death but all this was that allah might test what is in your breasts and purge what is in your hearts. for allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts.
those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts metname because of some evil they had done. but allah has blotted out their fault for allah is oftforgiving most forbearing.
o ye who believe be not like the unbelievers who say of their brethren when they are travelling through the earth or engaged in fighting if they had stayed with us they would not have died or been slain. this that allah may make it a cause of sighs and regrets in their hearts. it is allah that gives life and death and allah sees well all that ye do.
and if ye are slain or die in the way of allah forgiveness and mercy from allah are far better than all they could amass.
and if ye die or are slain lo it is unto allah that ye are brought together.
it is part of the mercy of allah that thou dost deal gently with them wert thou severe or harshhearted they would have broken away from about thee so pass over their faults and ask for allahxbs forgiveness for them and consult them in affairs of moment. then when thou hast taken a decision put thy trust in allah. for allah loves those who put their trust in him.
if allah helps you none can overcome you if he forsakes you who is there after that that can help you in allah then let believers put their trust.
no prophet could ever be false to his trust. if any person is so false he shall on the day of judgment restore what he misappropriated then shall every soul receive its duenamename
is the man who follows the good pleasure of allah like the man who draws on himself the wrath of allah and whose abode is in hell a woeful refuge
they are in varying gardens in the sight of allah and allah sees well all that they do.
allah did confer a great favour on the believers when he sent among them a messenger from among themselves rehearsing unto them the signs of allah sanctifying them and instructing them in scripture and wisdom while before that they had been in manifest error.
what when a single disaster smites you although ye smote your enemies with one twice as great do ye say whence is this say to them it is from yourselves for allah hath power over all things.
what ye suffered on the day the two armies met was with the leave of allah in order that he might test the believers
and the hypocrites also. these were told come fight in the way of allah or at least drive the foe from your city. they said had we known how to fight we should certainly have followed you. they were that day nearer to unbelief than to faith saying with their lips what was not in their hearts but allah hath full knowledge of all they conceal.
they are the ones that say of their brethren slain while they themselves sit at ease if only they had listened to us they would not have been slain. say avert death from your own selves if ye speak the truth.
think not of those who are slain in allahxbs way as dead. nay they live finding their sustenance in the presence of their lord
they rejoice in the bounty provided by allah and with regard to those left behind who have not yet joined them in their bliss the martyrs glory in the fact that on them is no fear nor have they cause to grieve.
they glory in the grace and the bounty from allah and in the fact that allah suffereth not the reward of the faithful to be lost in the least.
of those who answered the call of allah and the messenger even after being wounded those who do right and refrain from wrong have a great reward
men said to them a great army is gathering against you and frightened them but it only increased their faith they said for us allah sufficeth and he is the best disposer of affairs.
and they returned with grace and bounty from allah no harm ever touched them for they followed the good pleasure of allah and allah is the lord of bounties unbounded.
it is only the evil one that suggests to you the fear of his votaries be ye not afraid of them but fear me if ye have faith.
let not those grieve thee who rush headlong into unbelief not the least harm will they do to allah allahxbs plan is that he will give them no portion in the hereafter but a severe punishment.
those who purchase unbelief at the price of faithname but they will have a grievous punishment.
let not the unbelievers think that our respite to them is good for themselves we grant them respite that they may grow in their iniquity but they will have a shameful punishment.
allah will not leave the believers in the state in which ye are now until he separates what is evil from what is good nor will he disclose to you the secrets of the unseen. but he chooses of his messengers for the purpose whom he pleases. so believe in allah. and his messengers and if ye believe and do right ye have a reward without measure.
and let not those who covetously withhold of the gifts which allah hath given them of his grace think that it is good for them nay it will be the worse for them soon shall the things which they covetously withheld be tied to their necks like a twisted collar on the day of judgment. to allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth and allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do.
allah hath heard the taunt of those who say truly allah is indigent and we are rich we shall certainly record their word and their act of slaying the prophets in defiance of right and we shall say taste ye the penalty of the scorching fire
this is because of the unrighteous deeds which your hands sent on before ye for allah never harms those who serve him.
they also said allah took our promise not to believe in an messenger unless he showed us a sacrifice consumed by fire from heaven. say there came to you messengers before me with clear signs and even with what ye ask for why then did ye slay them if ye speak the truth
then if they reject thee so were rejected messengers before thee who came with clear signs books of dark prophecies and the book of enlightenment.
every soul shall have a taste of death and only on the day of judgment shall you be paid your full recompense. only he who is saved far from the fire and admitted to the garden will have attained the object of life for the life of this world is but goods and chattels of deception.
ye shall certainly be tried and tested in your possessions and in your personal selves and ye shall certainly hear much that will grieve you from those who received the book before you and from those who worship many gods. but if ye persevere patiently and guard against evilname
and remember allah took a covenant from the people of the book to make it known and clear to mankind and not to hide it but they threw it away behind their backs and purchased with it some miserable gain and vile was the bargain they made
think not that those who exult in what they have brought about and love to be praised for what they have not donename
to allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth and allah hath power over all things.
behold in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of night and dayname
men who celebrate the praises of allah standing sitting and lying down on their sides and contemplate the wonders of creation in the heavens and the earth with the thought our lord not for naught hast thou created all this glory to thee give us salvation from the penalty of the fire.
our lord any whom thou dost admit to the fire truly thou coverest with shame and never will wrongdoers find any helpers
our lord we have heard the call of one calling us to faith xbbelieve ye in the lordxb and we have believed. our lord forgive us our sins blot out from us our iniquities and take to thyself our souls in the company of the righteous.
our lord grant us what thou didst promise unto us through thine messengers and save us from shame on the day of judgment for thou never breakest thy promise.
and their lord hath accepted of them and answered them never will i suffer to be lost the work of any of you be he male or female ye are members one of another those who have left their homes or been driven out therefrom or suffered harm in my cause or fought or been slainname i will blot out from them their iniquities and admit them into gardens with rivers flowing beneath a reward from the presence of allah and from his presence is the best of rewards.
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee
little is it for enjoyment their ultimate abode is hell what an evil bed to lie on
on the other hand for those who fear their lord are gardens with rivers flowing beneath therein are they to dwell for ever a gift from the presence of allah and that which is in the presence of allah is the best bliss for the righteous.
and there are certainly among the people of the book those who believe in allah in the revelation to you and in the revelation to them bowing in humility to allah they will not sell the signs of allah for a miserable gain for them is a reward with their lord and allah is swift in account.
o ye who believe persevere in patience and constancy vie in such perseverance strengthen each other and fear allah that ye may prosper.
o mankind reverence your guardianlord who created you from a single person created of like nature his mate and from them twain scattered like seeds countless men and women reverence allah through whom ye demand your mutual rights and reverence the wombs that bore you for allah ever watches over you.
to orphans restore their property when they reach their age nor substitute your worthless things for their good ones and devour not their substance by mixing it up with your own. for this is indeed a great sin.
if ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans marry women of your choice two or three or four but if ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly with them then only one or a captive that your right hands possess that will be more suitable to prevent you from doing injustice.
and give the women on marriage their dower as a free gift but if they of their own good pleasure remit any part of it to you take it and enjoy it with right good cheer.
to those weak of understanding make not over your property which allah hath made a means of support for you but feed and clothe them therewith and speak to them words of kindness and justice.
make trial of orphans until they reach the age of marriage if then ye find sound judgment in them release their property to them but consume it not wastefully nor in haste against their growing up. if the guardian is welloff let him claim no remuneration but if he is poor let him have for himself what is just and reasonable. when ye release their property to them take witnesses in their presence but allsufficient is allah in taking account.
from what is left by parents and those nearest related there is a share for men and a share for women whether the property be small or largename
but if at the time of division other relatives or orphans or poor are present feed them out of the property and speak to them words of kindness and justice.
let those disposing of an estate have the same fear in their minds as they would have for their own if they had left a helpless family behind let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate comfort.
those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans eat up a fire into their own bodies they will soon be enduring a blazing fire
allah thus directs you as regards your childrenxbs inheritance to the male a portion equal to that of two females if only daughters two or more their share is twothirds of the inheritance if only one her share is a half. for parents a sixth share of the inheritance to each if the deceased left children if no children and the parents are the only heirs the mother has a third if the deceased left brothers or sisters the mother has a sixth. the distribution in all cases xbs after the payment of legacies and debts. ye know not whether your parents or your children are nearest to you in benefit. these are settled portions ordained by allah and allah is allknowing alwise.
in what your wives leave your share is a half if they leave no child but if they leave a child ye get a fourth after payment of legacies and debts. in what ye leave their share is a fourth if ye leave no child but if ye leave a child they get an eighth after payment of legacies and debts. if the man or woman whose inheritance is in question has left neither ascendants nor descendants but has left a brother or a sister each one of the two gets a sixth but if more than two they share in a third after payment of legacies and debts so that no loss is caused to any one. thus is it ordained by allah and allah is allknowing most forbearing.
those are limits set by allah those who obey allah and his messenger will be admitted to gardens with rivers flowing beneath to abide therein for ever and that will be the supreme achievement.
but those who disobey allah and his messenger and transgress his limits will be admitted to a fire to abide therein and they shall have a humiliating punishment.
if any of your women are guilty of lewdness take the evidence of four reliable witnesses from amongst you against them and if they testify confine them to houses until death do claim them or allah ordain for them some other way.
if two men among you are guilty of lewdness punish them both. if they repent and amend leave them alone for allah is oftreturning most merciful.
allah accept the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance and repent soon afterwards to them will allah turn in mercy for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
of no effect is the repentance of those who continue to do evil until death faces one of them and he says now have i repented indeed nor of those who die rejecting faith for them have we prepared a punishment most grievous.
o ye who believe ye are forbidden to inherit women against their will. nor should ye treat them with harshness that ye may take away part of the dower ye have given themexcept where they have been guilty of open lewdness on the contrary live with them on a footing of kindness and equity. if ye take a dislike to them it may be that ye dislike a thing and allah brings about through it a great deal of good.
but if ye decide to take one wife in place of another even if ye had given the latter a whole treasure for dower take not the least bit of it back would ye take it by slander and manifest wrong
and how could ye take it when ye have gone in unto each other and they have taken from you a solemn covenant
and marry not women whom your fathers marriednamename
prohibited to you for marriage are your mothers daughters sisters fatherxbs sisters motherxbs sisters brotherxbs daughters sisterxbs daughters fostermothers who gave you suck fostersisters your wivesxb mothers your stepdaughters under your guardianship born of your wives to whom ye have gone in no prohibition if ye have not gone in those who have been wives of your sons proceeding from your loins and two sisters in wedlock at one and the same time except for what is past for allah is oftforgiving most merciful
also prohibited are women already married except those whom your right hands possess thus hath allah ordained prohibitions against you except for these all others are lawful provided ye seek them in marriage with gifts from your propertyname not lust seeing that ye derive benefit from them give them their dowers at least as prescribed but if after a dower is prescribed agree mutually to vary it there is no blame on you and allah is allknowing allwise.
if any of you have not the means wherewith to wed free believing women they may wed believing girls from among those whom your right hands possess and allah hath full knowledge about your faith. ye are one from another wed them with the leave of their owners and give them their dowers according to what is reasonable they should be chaste not lustful nor taking paramours when they are taken in wedlock if they fall into shame their punishment is half that for free women. this permission is for those among you who fear sin but it is better for you that ye practise selfrestraint. and allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
allah doth wish to make clear to you and to show you the ordinances of those before you and he doth wish to turn to you in mercy and allah is allknowing allwise.
allah doth wish to turn to you but the wish of those who follow their lusts is that ye should turn away from himname far away.
allah doth wish to lighten your difficulties for man was created weak in flesh.
o ye who believe eat not up your property among yourselves in vanities but let there be amongst you traffic and trade by mutual goodwill nor kill or destroy yourselves for verily allah hath been to you most merciful
if any do that in rancour and injusticename
if ye but eschew the most heinous of the things which ye are forbidden to do we shall expel out of you all the evil in you and admit you to a gate of great honour.
and in no wise covet those things in which allah hath bestowed his gifts more freely on some of you than on others to men is allotted what they earn and to women what they earn but ask allah of his bounty. for allah hath full knowledge of all things.
to benefit every one we have appointed shares and heirs to property left by parents and relatives. to those also to whom your right hand was pledged give their due portion. for truly allah is witness to all things.
men are the protectors and maintainers of women because allah has given the one more strength than the other and because they support them from their means. therefore the righteous women are devoutly obedient and guard in the husbandxbs absence what allah would have them guard. as to those women on whose part ye fear disloyalty and illconduct admonish them first next refuse to share their beds and last beat them lightly but if they return to obedience seek not against them means of annoyance for allah is most high great above you all.
if ye fear a breach between them twain appoint two arbiters one from his family and the other from hers if they wish for peace allah will cause their reconciliation for allah hath full knowledge and is acquainted with all things.
serve allah and join not any partners with him and do good to parents kinsfolk orphans those in need neighbours who are near neighbours who are strangers the companion by your side the wayfarer ye meet and what your right hands possess for allah loveth not the arrogant the vainglorious
nor those who are niggardly or enjoin niggardliness on others or hide the bounties which allah hath bestowed on them for we have prepared for those who resist faith a punishment that steeps them in contempt
not those who spend of their substance to be seen of men but have no faith in allah and the last day if any take the evil one for their intimate what a dreadful intimate he is
and what burden were it on them if they had faith in allah and in the last day and they spent out of what allah hath given them for sustenance for allah hath full knowledge of them.
allah is never unjust in the least degree if there is any good done he doubleth it and giveth from his own presence a great reward.
how then if we brought from each people a witness and we brought thee as a witness against these people
on that day those who reject faith and disobey the messenger will wish that the earth were made one with them but never will they hide a single fact from allah
o ye who believe approach not prayers with a mind befogged until ye can understand all that ye sayname until after washing your whole body. if ye are ill or on a journey or one of you cometh from offices of nature or ye have been in contact with women and ye find no water then take for yourselves clean sand or earth and rub therewith your faces and hands. for allah doth blot out sins and forgive again and again.
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who were given a portion of the book they traffic in error and wish that ye should lose the right path.
but allah hath full knowledge of your enemies allah is enough for a protector and allah is enough for a helper.
of the jews there are those who displace words from their right places and say we hear and we disobey and hear what is not heard and raxbina with a twist of their tongues and a slander to faith. if only they had said what hear and we obey and do hear and do look at us it would have been better for them and more proper but allah hath cursed them for their unbelief and but few of them will believe.
o ye people of the book believe in what we have now revealed confirming what was already with you before we change the face and fame of some of you beyond all recognition and turn them hindwards or curse them as we cursed the sabbathbreakers for the decision of allah must be carried out.
allah forgiveth not that partners should be set up with him but he forgiveth anything else to whom he pleaseth to set up partners with allah is to devise a sin most heinous indeed.
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves naybut allah doth sanctify whom he pleaseth. but never will they fail to receive justice in the least little thing.
behold how they invent a lie against allah but that by itself is a manifest sin
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who were given a portion of the book they believe in sorcery and evil and say to the unbelievers that they are better guided in the right way than the believers
they are men whom allah hath cursed and those whom allah hath cursed thou wilt find have no one to help.
have they a share in dominion or power behold they give not a farthing to their fellowmen
or do they envy mankind for what allah hath given them of his bounty but we had already given the people of abraham the book and wisdom and conferred upon them a great kingdom.
some of them believed and some of them averted their faces from him and enough is hell for a burning fire.
those who reject our signs we shall soon cast into the fire as often as their skins are roasted through we shall change them for fresh skins that they may taste the penalty for allah is exalted in power wise.
but those who believe and do deeds of righteousness we shall soon admit to gardens with rivers flowing beneathname cool and ever deepening.
allah doth command you to render back your trusts to those to whom they are due and when ye judge between man and man that ye judge with justice verily how excellent is the teaching which he giveth you for allah is he who heareth and seeth all things.
o ye who believe obey allah and obey the messenger and those charged with authority among you. if ye differ in anything among yourselves refer it to allah and his messenger if ye do believe in allah and the last day that is best and most suitable for final determination.
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who declare that they believe in the revelations that have come to thee and to those before thee their real wish is to resort together for judgment in their disputes to the evil one though they were ordered to reject him. but satanxbs wish is to lead them astray far away from the right.
when it is said to them come to what allah hath revealed and to the messenger thou seest the hypocrites avert their faces from thee in disgust.
how then when they are seized by misfortune because of the deeds which they hands have sent forth then their come to thee swearing by allah we meant no more than goodwill and conciliation
those menallah knows what is in their hearts so keep clear of them but admonish them and speak to them a word to reach their very souls.
we sent not a messenger but to be obeyed in accordance with the will of allah. if they had only when they were unjust to themselves come unto thee and asked allahxbs forgiveness and the messenger had asked forgiveness for them they would have found allah indeed oftreturning most merciful.
but no by the lord they can have no real faith until they make thee judge in all disputes between them and find in their souls no resistance against thy decisions but accept them with the fullest conviction.
if we had ordered them to sacrifice their lives or to leave their homes very few of them would have done it but if they had done what they were actually told it would have been best for them and would have gone farthest to strengthen their faith
and we should then have given them from our presence a great reward
and we should have shown them the straight way.
all who obey allah and the messenger are in the company of those on whom is the grace of allahname the sincere lovers of truth the witnesses who testify and the righteous who do good ah what a beautiful fellowship
such is the bounty from allah and sufficient is it that allah knoweth all.
o ye who believe take your precautions and either go forth in parties or go forth all together.
there are certainly among you men who would tarry behind if a misfortune befalls you they say allah did favour us in that we were not present among them.
but if good fortune comes to you from allah they would be sure to say  as if there had never been ties of affection between you and them  oh i wish i had been with them a fine thing should i then have made of it
let those fight in the cause of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter. to him who fighteth in the cause of allah whether he is slain or gets victory  soon shall we give him a reward of great value.
and why should ye not fight in the cause of allah and of those who being weak are illtreated and oppressed men women and children whose cry is our lord rescue us from this town whose people are oppressors and raise for us from thee one who will protect and raise for us from thee one who will help
those who believe fight in the cause of allah and those who reject faith fight in the cause of evil so fight ye against the friends of satan feeble indeed is the cunning of satan.
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who were told to hold back their hands from fight but establish regular prayers and spend in regular charity when at length the order for fighting was issued to them behold a section of them feared men as  or even more than  they should have feared allah they said our lord why hast thou ordered us to fight wouldst thou not grant us respite to our natural term near enough say short is the enjoyment of this world the hereafter is the best for those who do right never will ye be dealt with unjustly in the very least
wherever ye are death will find you out even if ye are in towers built up strong and high if some good befalls them they say this is from allah but if evil they say this is from thee o prophet. say all things are from allah. but what hath come to these people that they fail to understand a single fact
whatever good o man happens to thee is from allah but whatever evil happens to thee is from thy own soul. and we have sent thee as a messenger to instruct mankind. and enough is allah for a witness.
he who obeys the messenger obeys allah but if any turn away we have not sent thee to watch over their evil deeds.
they have obedience on their lips but when they leave thee a section of them meditate all night on things very different from what thou tellest them. but allah records their nightly plots so keep clear of them and put thy trust in allah and enough is allah as a disposer of affairs.
do they not consider the qurxban with care had it been from other than allah they would surely have found therein much discrepancy.
when there comes to them some matter touching public safety or fear they divulge it. if they had only referred it to the messenger or to those charged with authority among them the proper investigators would have tested it from them direct. were it not for the grace and mercy of allah unto you all but a few of you would have fallen into the clutches of satan.
then fight in allahxbs cause  thou art held responsible only for thyself  and rouse the believers. it may be that allah will restrain the fury of the unbelievers for allah is the strongest in might and in punishment.
whoever recommends and helps a good cause becomes a partner therein and whoever recommends and helps an evil cause shares in its burden and allah hath power over all things.
when a courteous greeting is offered you meet it with a greeting still more courteous or at least of equal courtesy. allah takes careful account of all things.
allah there is no god but he of a surety he will gather you together against the day of judgment about which there is no doubt. and whose word can be truer than allahxbs
why should ye be divided into two parties about the hypocrites allah hath upset them for their evil deeds. would ye guide those whom allah hath thrown out of the way for those whom allah hath thrown out of the way never shalt thou find the way.
they but wish that ye should reject faith as they do and thus be on the same footing as they but take not friends from their ranks until they flee in the way of allah from what is forbidden. but if they turn renegades seize them and slay them wherever ye find them and in any case take no friends or helpers from their ranks
except those who join a group between whom and you there is a treaty of peace or those who approach you with hearts restraining them from fighting you as well as fighting their own people. if allah had pleased he could have given them power over you and they would have fought you therefore if they withdraw from you but fight you not and instead send you guarantees of peace then allah hath opened no way for you to war against them.
others you will find that wish to gain your confidence as well as that of their people every time they are sent back to temptation they succumb thereto if they withdraw not from you nor give you guarantees of peace besides restraining their hands seize them and slay them wherever ye get them in their case we have provided you with a clear argument against them.
never should a believer kill a believer but if it so happens by mistake compensation is due if one so kills a believer it is ordained that he should free a believing slave and pay compensation to the deceasedxbs family unless they remit it freely. if the deceased belonged to a people at war with you and he was a believer the freeing of a believing slave is enough. if he belonged to a people with whom ye have treaty of mutual alliance compensation should be paid to his family and a believing slave be freed. for those who find this beyond their means is prescribed a fast for two months running by way of repentance to allah for allah hath all knowledge and all wisdom.
if a man kills a believer intentionally his recompense is hell to abide therein for ever and the wrath and the curse of allah are upon him and a dreadful penalty is prepared for him.
o ye who believe when ye go abroad in the cause of allah investigate carefully and say not to any one who offers you a salutation thou art none of a believer coveting the perishable goods of this life with allah are profits and spoils abundant. even thus were ye yourselves before till allah conferred on you his favours therefore carefully investigate. for allah is well aware of all that ye do.
not equal are those believers who sit at home and receive no hurt and those who strive and fight in the cause of allah with their goods and their persons. allah hath granted a grade higher to those who strive and fight with their goods and persons than to those who sit at home. unto all in faith hath allah promised good but those who strive and fight hath he distinguished above those who sit at home by a special reward
ranks specially bestowed by him and forgiveness and mercy. for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
when angels take the souls of those who die in sin against their souls they say in what plight were ye they reply weak and oppressed were we in the earth. they say was not the earth of allah spacious enough for you to move yourselves away from evil such men will find their abode in hell what an evil refuge 
except those who are really weak and oppressed  men women and children  who have no means in their power nor a guidepost to their way.
for these there is hope that allah will forgive for allah doth blot out sins and forgive again and again.
he who forsakes his home in the cause of allah finds in the earth many a refuge wide and spacious should he die as a refugee from home for allah and his messenger his reward becomes due and sure with allah and allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
when ye travel through the earth there is no blame on you if ye shorten your prayers for fear the unbelievers may attack you for the unbelievers are unto you open enemies.
when thou o messenger art with them and standest to lead them in prayer let one party of them stand up in prayer with thee taking their arms with them when they finish their prostrations let them take their position in the rear. and let the other party come up which hath not yet prayed  and let them pray with thee taking all precaution and bearing arms the unbelievers wish if ye were negligent of your arms and your baggage to assault you in a single rush. but there is no blame on you if ye put away your arms because of the inconvenience of rain or because ye are ill but take every precaution for yourselves. for the unbelievers allah hath prepared a humiliating punishment.
when ye pass congregational prayers celebrate allahxbs praises standing sitting down or lying down on your sides but when ye are free from danger set up regular prayers for such prayers are enjoined on believers at stated times.
and slacken not in following up the enemy if ye are suffering hardships they are suffering similar hardships but ye have hope from allah while they have none. and allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
we have sent down to thee the book in truth that thou mightest judge between men as guided by allah so be not used as an advocate by those who betray their trust
but seek the forgiveness of allah for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
contend not on behalf of such as betray their own souls for allah loveth not one given to perfidy and crime
they may hide their crimes from men but they cannot hide them from allah seeing that he is in their midst when they plot by night in words that he cannot approve and allah doth compass round all that they do.
ah these are the sort of men on whose behalf ye may contend in this world but who will contend with allah on their behalf on the day of judgment or who will carry their affairs through
if any one does evil or wrongs his own soul but afterwards seeks allahxbs forgiveness he will find allah oftforgiving most merciful.
and if any one earns sin. he earns it against his own soul for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
but if any one earns a fault or a sin and throws it on to one that is innocent he carries on himself both a falsehood and a flagrant sin.
but for the grace of allah to thee and his mercy a party of them would certainly have plotted to lead thee astray. but in fact they will only lead their own souls astray and to thee they can do no harm in the least. for allah hath sent down to thee the book and wisdom and taught thee what thou knewest not before and great is the grace of allah unto thee.
in most of their secret talks there is no good but if one exhorts to a deed of charity or justice or conciliation between men secrecy is permissible to him who does this seeking the good pleasure of allah we shall soon give a reward of the highest value.
if anyone contends with the messenger even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him and follows a path other than that becoming to men of faith we shall leave him in the path he has chosen and land him in hell what an evil refuge
allah forgiveth not the sin of joining other gods with him but he forgiveth whom he pleaseth other sins than this one who joins other gods with allah hath strayed far far away from the right.
the pagans leaving him call but upon female deities they call but upon satan the persistent rebel
allah did curse him but he said i will take of thy servants a portion marked off
i will mislead them and i will create in them false desires i will order them to slit the ears of cattle and to deface the fair nature created by allah. whoever forsaking allah takes satan for a friend hath of a surety suffered a loss that is manifest.
satan makes them promises and creates in them false desires but satanxbs promises are nothing but deception.
they his dupes will have their dwelling in hell and from it they will find no way of escape.
but those who believe and do deeds of righteousnessname with rivers flowing beneathname and whose word can be truer than allahxbs
not your desires nor those of the people of the book can prevail whoever works evil will be requited accordingly. nor will he find besides allah any protector or helper.
if any do deeds of righteousnessname they will enter heaven and not the least injustice will be done to them.
who can be better in religion than one who submits his whole self to allah does good and follows the way of abraham the true in faith for allah did take abraham for a friend.
but to allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth and he it is that encompasseth all things.
they ask thy instruction concerning the women say allah doth instruct you about them and remember what hath been rehearsed unto you in the book concerning the orphans of women to whom ye give not the portions prescribed and yet whom ye desire to marry as also concerning the children who are weak and oppressed that ye stand firm for justice to orphans. there is not a good deed which ye do but allah is wellacquainted therewith.
if a wife fears cruelty or desertion on her husbandxbs part there is no blame on them if they arrange an amicable settlement between themselves and such settlement is best even though menxbs souls are swayed by greed. but if ye do good and practise selfrestraint allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do.
ye are never able to be fair and just as between women even if it is your ardent desire but turn not away from a woman altogether so as to leave her as it were hanging in the air. if ye come to a friendly understanding and practise selfrestraint allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
but if they disagree and must part allah will provide abundance for all from his allreaching bounty for allah is he that careth for all and is wise.
to allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth. verily we have directed the people of the book before you and you o muslims to fear allah. but if ye deny him lo unto allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth and allah is free of all wants worthy of all praise.
yea unto allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth and enough is allah to carry through all affairs.
if it were his will he could destroy you o mankind and create another race for he hath power this to do.
if any one desires a reward in this life in allahxbs gift is the reward both of this life and of the hereafter for allah is he that heareth and seeth all things.
o ye who believe stand out firmly for justice as witnesses to allah even as against yourselves or your parents or your kin and whether it be against rich or poor for allah can best protect both. follow not the lusts of your hearts lest ye swerve and if ye distort justice or decline to do justice verily allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do.
o ye who believe believe in allah and his messenger and the scripture which he hath sent to his messenger and the scripture which he sent to those before him. any who denieth allah his angels his books his messengers and the day of judgment hath gone far far astray.
those who believe then reject faith then believe again and again reject faith and go on increasing in unbeliefname
to the hypocrites give the glad tidings that there is for them but a grievous penalty
yea to those who take for friends unbelievers rather than believers is it honour they seek among them nayname
already has he sent you word in the book that when ye hear the signs of allah held in defiance and ridicule ye are not to sit with them unless they turn to a different theme if ye did ye would be like them. for allah will collect the hypocrites and those who defy faith  all in hell
these are the ones who wait and watch about you if ye do gain a victory from allah they say were we not with you but if the unbelievers gain a success they say to them did we not gain an advantage over you and did we not guard you from the believers but allah will judge betwixt you on the day of judgment. and never will allah grant to the unbelievers a way to triumphs over the believers.
the hypocrites  they think they are overreaching allah but he will overreach them when they stand up to prayer they stand without earnestness to be seen of men but little do they hold allah in remembrance
they are distracted in mind even in the midst of itnamename
o ye who believe take not for friends unbelievers rather than believers do ye wish to offer allah an open proof against yourselves
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire no helper wilt thou find for them
except for those who repent mend their lives hold fast to allah and purify their religion as in allahxbs sight if so they will be numbered with the believers. and soon will allah grant to the believers a reward of immense value.
what can allah gain by your punishment if ye are grateful and ye believe nay it is allah that recogniseth all good and knoweth all things.
allah loveth not that evil should be noised abroad in public speech except where injustice hath been done for allah is he who heareth and knoweth all things.
whether ye publish a good deed or conceal it or cover evil with pardon verily allah doth blot out sins and hath power in the judgment of values.
those who deny allah and his messengers and those who wish to separate allah from his messengers saying we believe in some but reject others and those who wish to take a course midway
they are in truth equally unbelievers and we have prepared for unbelievers a humiliating punishment.
to those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of the messengers we shall soon give their due rewards for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
the people of the book ask thee to cause a book to descend to them from heaven indeed they asked moses for an even greater miracle for they said show us allah in public but they were dazed for their presumption with thunder and lightning. yet they worshipped the calf even after clear signs had come to them even so we forgave them and gave moses manifest proofs of authority.
and for their covenant we raised over them the towering height of mount sinai and on another occasion we said enter the gate with humility and once again we commanded them transgress not in the matter of the sabbath. and we took from them a solemn covenant.
they have incurred divine displeasure in that they broke their covenant that they rejected the signs of allah that they slew the messengers in defiance of right that they said our hearts are the wrappings which preserve allahxbs word we need no more nay allah hath set the seal on their hearts for their blasphemy and little is it they believe
that they rejected faith that they uttered against mary a grave false charge
that they said in boast we killed christ jesus the son of mary the messenger of allah but they killed him not nor crucified him but so it was made to appear to them and those who differ therein are full of doubts with no certain knowledge but only conjecture to follow for of a surety they killed him not
nay allah raised him up unto himself and allah is exalted in power wise
and there is none of the people of the book but must believe in him before his death and on the day of judgment he will be a witness against them
for the iniquity of the jews we made unlawful for them certain foods good and wholesome which had been lawful for them in that they hindered many from allahxbs way
that they took usury though they were forbidden and that they devoured menxbs substance wrongfully we have prepared for those among them who reject faith a grievous punishment.
but those among them who are wellgrounded in knowledge and the believers believe in what hath been revealed to thee and what was revealed before thee and especially those who establish regular prayer and practise regular charity and believe in allah and in the last day to them shall we soon give a great reward.
we have sent thee inspiration as we sent it to noah and the messengers after him we sent inspiration to abraham ismaxbil isaac jacob and the tribes to jesus job jonah aaron and solomon and to david we gave the psalms.
of some messengers we have already told thee the story of others we have not and to moses allah spoke direct
messengers who gave good news as well as warning that mankind after the coming of the messengers should have no plea against allah for allah is exalted in power wise.
but allah beareth witness that what he hath sent unto thee he hath sent from his own knowledge and the angels bear witness but enough is allah for a witness.
those who reject faith and keep off men from the way of allah have verily strayed far far away from the path.
those who reject faith and do wrong allah will not forgive them nor guide them to any way
except the way of hell to dwell therein for ever. and this to allah is easy.
o mankind the messenger hath come to you in truth from allah believe in him it is best for you. but if ye reject faith to allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth and allah is allknowing allwise.
o people of the book commit no excesses in your religion nor say of allah aught but the truth. christ jesus the son of mary was no more than a messenger of allah and his word which he bestowed on mary and a spirit proceeding from him so believe in allah and his messengers. say not trinity  desist it will be better for you for allah is one allah glory be to him far exalted is he above having a son. to him belong all things in the heavens and on earth. and enough is allah as a disposer of affairs.
christ disdaineth nor to serve and worship allah nor do the angels those nearest to allah those who disdain his worship and are arroganthe will gather them all together unto himself to answer.
but to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness he will give their due rewardsname out of his bounty but those who are disdainful and arrogant he will punish with a grievous penalty nor will they find besides allah any to protect or help them.
o mankind verily there hath come to you a convincing proof from your lord for we have sent unto you a light that is manifest.
then those who believe in allah and hold fast to himname and guide them to himself by a straight way.
they ask thee for a legal decision. say allah directs thus about those who leave no descendants or ascendants as heirs. if it is a man that dies leaving a sister but no child she shall have half the inheritance if such a deceased was a woman who left no child her brother takes her inheritance if there are two sisters they shall have twothirds of the inheritance between them if there are brothers and sisters they share the male having twice the share of the female. thus doth allah make clear to you his law lest ye err. and allah hath knowledge of all things.
o ye who believe fulfil all obligations. lawful unto you for food are all fourfooted animals with the exceptions named but animals of the chase are forbidden while ye are in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb for allah doth command according to his will and plan.
o ye who believe violate not the sanctity of the symbols of allah nor of the sacred month nor of the animals brought for sacrifice nor the garlands that mark out such animals nor the people resorting to the sacred house seeking of the bounty and good pleasure of their lord. but when ye are clear of the sacred precincts and of pilgrim garb ye may hunt and let not the hatred of some people in once shutting you out of the sacred mosque lead you to transgression and hostility on your part. help ye one another in righteousness and piety but help ye not one another in sin and rancour fear allah for allah is strict in punishment.
forbidden to you for food are dead meat blood the flesh of swine and that on which hath been invoked the name of other than allah that which hath been killed by strangling or by a violent blow or by a headlong fall or by being gored to death that which hath been partly eaten by a wild animal unless ye are able to slaughter it in due form that which is sacrificed on stone altars forbidden also is the division of meat by raffling with arrows that is impiety. this day have those who reject faith given up all hope of your religion yet fear them not but fear me. this day have i perfected your religion for you completed my favour upon you and have chosen for you islam as your religion. but if any is forced by hunger with no inclination to transgression allah is indeed oftforgiving most merciful.
they ask thee what is lawful to them as food. say lawful unto you are all things good and pure and what ye have taught your trained hunting animals to catch in the manner directed to you by allah eat what they catch for you but pronounce the name of allah over it and fear allah for allah is swift in taking account.
this day are all things good and pure made lawful unto you. the food of the people of the book is lawful unto you and yours is lawful unto them. lawful unto you in marriage are not only chaste women who are believers but chaste women among the people of the book revealed before your timename and desire chastity not lewdness nor secret intrigues if any one rejects faith fruitless is his work and in the hereafter he will be in the ranks of those who have lost all spiritual good.
o ye who believe when ye prepare for prayer wash your faces and your hands and arms to the elbows rub your heads with water and wash your feet to the ankles. if ye are in a state of ceremonial impurity bathe your whole body. but if ye are ill or on a journey or one of you cometh from offices of nature or ye have been in contact with women and ye find no water then take for yourselves clean sand or earth and rub therewith your faces and hands allah doth not wish to place you in a difficulty but to make you clean and to complete his favour to you that ye may be grateful.
and call in remembrance the favour of allah unto you and his covenant which he ratified with you when ye said we hear and we obey and fear allah for allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts.
o ye who believe stand out firmly for allah as witnesses to fair dealing and let not the hatred of others to you make you swerve to wrong and depart from justice. be just that is next to piety and fear allah. for allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do.
to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness hath allah promised forgiveness and a great reward.
those who reject faith and deny our signs will be companions of hellfire.
o ye who believe call in remembrance the favour of allah unto you when certain men formed the design to stretch out their hands against you but allah held back their hands from you so fear allah. and on allah let believers put all their trust.
allah did aforetime take a covenant from the children of israel and we appointed twelve captains among them. and allah said i am with you if ye but establish regular prayers practise regular charity believe in my messengers honour and assist them and loan to allah a beautiful loan verily i will wipe out from you your evils and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing beneath but if any of you after this resisteth faith he hath truly wandered from the path or rectitude.
but because of their breach of their covenant we cursed them and made their hearts grow hard they change the words from their right places and forget a good part of the message that was sent them nor wilt thou cease to find them barring a few  ever bent on new deceits but forgive them and overlook their misdeeds for allah loveth those who are kind.
from those too who call themselves christians we did take a covenant but they forgot a good part of the message that was sent them so we estranged them with enmity and hatred between the one and the other to the day of judgment. and soon will allah show them what it is they have done.
o people of the book there hath come to you our messenger revealing to you much that ye used to hide in the book and passing over much that is now unnecessary there hath come to you from allah a new light and a perspicuous book 
wherewith allah guideth all who seek his good pleasure to ways of peace and safety and leadeth them out of darkness by his will unto the lightname
in blasphemy indeed are those that say that allah is christ the son of mary. say who then hath the least power against allah if his will were to destroy christ the son of mary his mother and all every  one that is on the earth for to allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between. he createth what he pleaseth. for allah hath power over all things.
both the jews and the christians say we are sons of allah and his beloved. say why then doth he punish you for your sins nay ye are but menname and he punisheth whom he pleaseth and to allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between and unto him is the final goal of all
o people of the book now hath come unto you making things clear unto you our messenger after the break in the series of our messengers lest ye should say there came unto us no bringer of glad tidings and no warner from evil but now hath come unto you a bringer of glad tidings and a warner from evil. and allah hath power over all things.
remember moses said to his people o my people call in remembrance the favour of allah unto you when he produced prophets among you made you kings and gave you what he had not given to any other among the peoples.
o my people enter the holy land which allah hath assigned unto you and turn not back ignominiously for then will ye be overthrown to your own ruin.
they said o moses in this land are a people of exceeding strength never shall we enter it until they leave it if once they leave then shall we enter.
but among their allahfearing men were two on whom allah had bestowed his grace they said assault them at the proper gate when once ye are in victory will be yours but on allah put your trust if ye have faith.
they said o moses while they remain there never shall we be able to enter to the end of time. go thou and thy lord and fight ye two while we sit here and watch.
he said o my lord i have power only over myself and my brother so separate us from this rebellious people
allah said therefore will the land be out of their reach for forty years in distraction will they wander through the land but sorrow thou not over these rebellious people.
recite to them the truth of the story of the two sons of adam. behold they each presented a sacrifice to allah it was accepted from one but not from the other. said the latter be sure i will slay thee. surely said the former allah doth accept of the sacrifice of those who are righteous.
if thou dost stretch thy hand against me to slay me it is not for me to stretch my hand against thee to slay thee for i do fear allah the cherisher of the worlds.
for me i intend to let thee draw on thyself my sin as well as thine for thou wilt be among the companions of the fire and that is the reward of those who do wrong.
the selfish soul of the other led him to the murder of his brother he murdered him and became himself one of the lost ones.
then allah sent a raven who scratched the ground to show him how to hide the shame of his brother. woe is me said he was i not even able to be as this raven and to hide the shame of my brother then he became full of regrets
on that account we ordained for the children of israel that if any one slew a person  unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief in the land  it would be as if he slew the whole people and if any one saved a life it would be as if he saved the life of the whole people. then although there came to them our messengers with clear signs yet even after that many of them continued to commit excesses in the land.
the punishment of those who wage war against allah and his messenger and strive with might and main for mischief through the land is execution or crucifixion or the cutting off of hands and feet from opposite sides or exile from the land that is their disgrace in this world and a heavy punishment is theirs in the hereafter
except for those who repent before they fall into your power in that case know that allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o ye who believe do your duty to allah seek the means of approach unto him and strive with might and main in his cause that ye may prosper.
as to those who reject faithname and twice repeated to give as ransom for the penalty of the day of judgment it would never be accepted of them theirs would be a grievous penalty.
their wish will be to get out of the fire but never will they get out therefrom their penalty will be one that endures.
as to the thief male or female cut off his or her hands a punishment by way of example from allah for their crime and allah is exalted in power.
but if the thief repents after his crime and amends his conduct allah turneth to him in forgiveness for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
knowest thou not that to allah alone belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth he punisheth whom he pleaseth and he forgiveth whom he pleaseth and allah hath power over all things.
o messenger let not those grieve thee who race each other into unbelief whether it be among those who say we believe with their lips but whose hearts have no faith or it be among the jewsnamename if ye are given this take it but if not beware if any onexbs trial is intended by allah thou hast no authority in the least for him against allah. for such  it is not allahxbs will to purify their hearts. for them there is disgrace in this world and in the hereafter a heavy punishment.
they are fond of listening to falsehood of devouring anything forbidden. if they do come to thee either judge between them or decline to interfere. if thou decline they cannot hurt thee in the least. if thou judge judge in equity between them. for allah loveth those who judge in equity.
but why do they come to thee for decision when they have their own law before them therein is the plain command of allah yet even after that they would turn away. for they are not really people of faith.
it was we who revealed the law to moses therein was guidance and light. by its standard have been judged the jews by the prophets who bowed as in islam to allahxbs will by the rabbis and the doctors of law for to them was entrusted the protection of allahxbs book and they were witnesses thereto therefore fear not men but fear me and sell not my signs for a miserable price. if any do fail to judge by the light of what allah hath revealed they are no better than unbelievers.
we ordained therein for them life for life eye for eye nose or nose ear for ear tooth for tooth and wounds equal for equal. but if any one remits the retaliation by way of charity it is an act of atonement for himself. and if any fail to judge by the light of what allah hath revealed they are no better than wrongdoers.
and in their footsteps we sent jesus the son of mary confirming the law that had come before him we sent him the gospel therein was guidance and light and confirmation of the law that had come before him a guidance and an admonition to those who fear allah.
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah hath revealed therein. if any do fail to judge by the light of what allah hath revealed they are no better than those who rebel.
to thee we sent the scripture in truth confirming the scripture that came before it and guarding it in safety so judge between them by what allah hath revealed and follow not their vain desires diverging from the truth that hath come to thee. to each among you have we prescribed a law and an open way. if allah had so willed he would have made you a single people but his plan is to test you in what he hath given you so strive as in a race in all virtues. the goal of you all is to allah it is he that will show you the truth of the matters in which ye dispute
and this he commands judge thou between them by what allah hath revealed and follow not their vain desires but beware of them lest they beguile thee from any of that teaching which allah hath sent down to thee. and if they turn away be assured that for some of their crime it is allahxbs purpose to punish them. and truly most men are rebellious.
do they then seek after a judgment of the days of ignorance but who for a people whose faith is assured can give better judgment than allah
o ye who believe take not the jews and the christians for your friends and protectors they are but friends and protectors to each other. and he amongst you that turns to them for friendship is of them. verily allah guideth not a people unjust.
those in whose hearts is a disease  thou seest how eagerly they run about amongst them saying we do fear lest a change of fortune bring us disaster. ah perhaps allah will give thee victory or a decision according to his will. then will they repent of the thoughts which they secretly harboured in their hearts.
and those who believe will say are these the men who swore their strongest oaths by allah that they were with you all that they do will be in vain and they will fall into nothing but ruin.
o ye who believe if any from among you turn back from his faith soon will allah produce a people whom he will love as they will love himname mighty against the rejecters fighting in the way of allah and never afraid of the reproaches of such as find fault. that is the grace of allah which he will bestow on whom he pleaseth. and allah encompasseth all and he knoweth all things.
your real friends are no less than allah his messenger and the fellowship of believersname and they bow down humbly in worship.
as to those who turn for friendship to allah his messenger and the fellowship of believersname
o ye who believe take not for friends and protectors those who take your religion for a mockery or sportname or among those who reject faith but fear ye allah if ye have faith indeed.
when ye proclaim your call to prayer they take it but as mockery and sport that is because they are a people without understanding.
say o people of the book do ye disapprove of us for no other reason than that we believe in allah and the revelation that hath come to us and that which came before us and perhaps that most of you are rebellious and disobedient
say shall i point out to you something much worse than this as judged by the treatment it received from allah those who incurred the curse of allah and his wrath those of whom some he transformed into apes and swine those who worshipped evil these are many times worse in rank and far more astray from the even path
when they come to thee they say we believe but in fact they enter with a mind against faith and they go out with the same but allah knoweth fully all that they hide.
many of them dost thou see racing each other in sin and rancour and their eating of things forbidden. evil indeed are the things that they do.
why do not the rabbis and the doctors of law forbid them from their habit of uttering sinful words and eating things forbidden evil indeed are their works.
the jews say allahxbs hand is tied up. be their hands tied up and be they accursed for the blasphemy they utter. nay both his hands are widely outstretched he giveth and spendeth of his bounty as he pleaseth. but the revelation that cometh to thee from allah increaseth in most of them their obstinate rebellion and blasphemy. amongst them we have placed enmity and hatred till the day of judgment. every time they kindle the fire of war allah doth extinguish it but they ever strive to do mischief on earth. and allah loveth not those who do mischief.
if only the people of the book had believed and been righteous we should indeed have blotted out their iniquities and admitted them to gardens of bliss.
if only they had stood fast by the law the gospel and all the revelation that was sent to them from their lord they would have enjoyed happiness from every side. there is from among them a party on the right course but many of them follow a course that is evil.
o messenger proclaim the message which hath been sent to thee from thy lord. if thou didst not thou wouldst not have fulfilled and proclaimed his mission. and allah will defend thee from men who mean mischief. for allah guideth not those who reject faith.
say o people of the book ye have no ground to stand upon unless ye stand fast by the law the gospel and all the revelation that has come to you from your lord. it is the revelation that cometh to thee from thy lord that increaseth in most of them their obstinate rebellion and blasphemy. but sorrow thou not over these people without faith.
those who believe in the qurxban those who follow the jewish scriptures and the sabians and the christiansname and work righteousnessname nor shall they grieve.
we took the covenant of the children of israel and sent them messengers every time there came to them a messenger with what they themselves desired not  some of these they called impostors and some they go so far as to slay.
they thought there would be no trial or punishment so they became blind and deaf yet allah in mercy turned to them yet again many of them became blind and deaf. but allah sees well all that they do.
they do blaspheme who say allah is christ the son of mary. but said christ o children of israel worship allah my lord and your lord. whoever joins other gods with allahname and the fire will be his abode. there will for the wrongdoers be no one to help.
they do blaspheme who say allah is one of three in a trinity for there is no god except one allah. if they desist not from their word of blasphemy verily a grievous penalty will befall the blasphemers among them.
why turn they not to allah and seek his forgiveness for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
christ the son of mary was no more than a messenger many were the messengers that passed away before him. his mother was a woman of truth. they had both to eat their daily food. see how allah doth make his signs clear to them yet see in what ways they are deluded away from the truth
say will ye worship besides allah something which hath no power either to harm or benefit you but allah he it is that heareth and knoweth all things.
say o people of the book exceed not in your religion the bounds of what is proper trespassing beyond the truth nor follow the vain desires of people who went wrong in times gone byname and strayed themselves from the even way.
curses were pronounced on those among the children of israel who rejected faith by the tongue of david and of jesus the son of mary because they disobeyed and persisted in excesses.
nor did they usually forbid one another the iniquities which they committed evil indeed were the deeds which they did.
thou seest many of them turning in friendship to the unbelievers. evil indeed are the works which their souls have sent forward before them with the result that allahxbs wrath is on them and in torment will they abide.
if only they had believed in allah in the prophet and in what hath been revealed to him never would they have taken them for friends and protectors but most of them are rebellious wrongdoers.
strongest among men in enmity to the believers wilt thou find the jews and pagans and nearest among them in love to the believers wilt thou find those who say we are christians because amongst these are men devoted to learning and men who have renounced the world and they are not arrogant.
and when they listen to the revelation received by the messenger thou wilt see their eyes overflowing with tears for they recognise the truth they pray our lord we believe write us down among the witnesses.
what cause can we have not to believe in allah and the truth which has come to us seeing that we long for our lord to admit us to the company of the righteous
and for this their prayer hath allah rewarded them with gardens with rivers flowing underneathname
but those who reject faith and belie our signsname
o ye who believe make not unlawful the good things which allah hath made lawful for you but commit no excess for allah loveth not those given to excess.
eat of the things which allah hath provided for you lawful and good but fear allah in whom ye believe.
allah will not call you to account for what is futile in your oaths but he will call you to account for your deliberate oaths for expiation feed ten indigent persons on a scale of the average for the food of your families or clothe them or give a slave his freedom. if that is beyond your means fast for three days. that is the expiation for the oaths ye have sworn. but keep to your oaths. thus doth allah make clear to you his signs that ye may be grateful.
o ye who believe intoxicants and gambling dedication of stones and divination by arrows are an abominationname that ye may prosper.
satanxbs plan is but to excite enmity and hatred between you with intoxicants and gambling and hinder you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer will ye not then abstain
obey allah and obey the messenger and beware of evil if ye do turn back know ye that it is our messengerxbs duty to proclaim the message in the clearest manner.
on those who believe and do deeds of righteousness there is no blame for what they ate in the past when they guard themselves from evil and believe and do deeds of righteousnessname guard themselves from evil and believename guard themselves from evil and do good. for allah loveth those who do good.
o ye who believe allah doth but make a trial of you in a little matter of game well within reach of game well within reach of your hands and your lances that he may test who feareth him unseen any who transgress thereafter will have a grievous penalty.
o ye who believe kill not game while in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb. if any of you doth so intentionally the compensation is an offering brought to the kaxbba of a domestic animal equivalent to the one he killed as adjudged by two just men among you or by way of atonement the feeding of the indigent or its equivalent in fasts that he may taste of the penalty of his deed. allah forgives what is past for repetition allah will exact from him the penalty. for allah is exalted and lord of retribution.
lawful to you is the pursuit of watergame and its use for food for the benefit of yourselves and those who travel but forbidden is the pursuit of landgame as long as ye are in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb. and fear allah to whom ye shall be gathered back.
allah made the kaxbba the sacred house an asylum of security for men as also the sacred months the animals for offerings and the garlands that mark them that ye may know that allah hath knowledge of what is in the heavens and on earth and that allah is well acquainted with all things.
know ye that allah is strict in punishment and that allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
the messengerxbs duty is but to proclaim the message. but allah knoweth all that ye reveal and ye conceal.
say not equal are things that are bad and things that are good even though the abundance of the bad may dazzle thee so fear allah o ye that understand that so ye may prosper.
o ye who believe ask not questions about things which if made plain to you may cause you trouble. but if ye ask about things when the qurxban is being revealed they will be made plain to you allah will forgive those for allah is oftforgiving most forbearing.
some people before you did ask such questions and on that account lost their faith.
it was not allah who instituted superstitions like those of a slitear shecamel or a shecamel let loose for free pasture or idol sacrifices for twinbirths in animals or stallioncamels freed from work it is blasphemers who invent a lie against allah but most of them lack wisdom.
when it is said to them come to what allah hath revealed come to the messenger they say enough for us are the ways we found our fathers following. what even though their fathers were void of knowledge and guidance
o ye who believe guard your own souls if ye follow right guidance no hurt can come to you from those who stray. the goal of you all is to allah it is he that will show you the truth of all that ye do.
o ye who believe when death approaches any of you take witnesses among yourselves when making bequestsname and the chance of death befalls you thus. if ye doubt their truth detain them both after prayer and let them both swear by allah we wish not in this for any worldly gain even though the beneficiary be our near relation we shall hide not the evidence before allah if we do then behold the sin be upon us
but if it gets known that these two were guilty of the sin of perjury let two others stand forth in their places nearest in kin from among those who claim a lawful right let them swear by allah we affirm that our witness is truer than that of those two and that we have not trespassed beyond the truth if we did behold the wrong be upon us
that is most suitable that they may give the evidence in its true nature and shape or else they would fear that other oaths would be taken after their oaths. but fear allah and listen to his counsel for allah guideth not a rebellious people
one day will allah gather the messengers together and ask what was the response ye received from men to your teaching they will say we have no knowledge it is thou who knowest in full all that is hidden.
then will allah say o jesus the son of mary recount my favour to thee and to thy mother. behold i strengthened thee with the holy spirit so that thou didst speak to the people in childhood and in maturity. behold i taught thee the book and wisdom the law and the gospel and behold thou makest out of clay as it were the figure of a bird by my leave and thou breathest into it and it becometh a bird by my leave and thou healest those born blind and the lepers by my leave. and behold thou bringest forth the dead by my leave. and behold i did restrain the children of israel from violence to thee when thou didst show them the clear signs and the unbelievers among them said xbthis is nothing but evident magic.xb
and behold i inspired the disciples to have faith in me and mine messenger they said xbwe have faith and do thou bear witness that we bow to allah as muslimsxb.
behold the disciples said o jesus the son of mary can thy lord send down to us a table set with viands from heaven said jesus fear allah if ye have faith.
they said we only wish to eat thereof and satisfy our hearts and to know that thou hast indeed told us the truth and that we ourselves may be witnesses to the miracle.
said jesus the son of mary o allah our lord send us from heaven a table set with viands that there may be for us  for the first and the last of us  a solemn festival and a sign from thee and provide for our sustenance for thou art the best sustainer of our needs.
allah said i will send it down unto you but if any of you after that resisteth faith i will punish him with a penalty such as i have not inflicted on any one among all the peoples.
and behold allah will say o jesus the son of mary didst thou say unto men worship me and my mother as gods in derogation of allahxb he will say glory to thee never could i say what i had no right to say. had i said such a thing thou wouldst indeed have known it. thou knowest what is in my heart thou i know not what is in thine. for thou knowest in full all that is hidden.
never said i to them aught except what thou didst command me to say to wit xbworship allah my lord and your lordxb and i was a witness over them whilst i dwelt amongst them when thou didst take me up thou wast the watcher over them and thou art a witness to all things.
if thou dost punish them they are thy servant if thou dost forgive them thou art the exalted in power the wise.
allah will say this is a day on which the truthful will profit from their truth theirs are gardens with rivers flowing beneathname and they with allah that is the great salvation the fulfilment of all desires.
to allah doth belong the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is therein and it is he who hath power over all things.
praise be allah who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light. yet those who reject faith hold others as equal with their guardianlord.
he it is created you from clay and then decreed a stated term for you. and there is in his presence another determined term yet ye doubt within yourselves
and he is allah in the heavens and on earth. he knoweth what ye hide and what ye reveal and he knoweth the recompense which ye earn by your deeds.
but never did a single one of the signs of their lord reach them but they turned away therefrom.
and now they reject the truth when it reaches them but soon shall they learn the reality of what they used to mock at.
see they not how many of those before them we did destroy generations we had established on the earth in strength such as we have not given to you  for whom we poured out rain from the skies in abundance and gave fertile streams flowing beneath their feet yet for their sins we destroyed them and raised in their wake fresh generations to succeed them.
if we had sent unto thee a written message on parchment so that they could touch it with their hands the unbelievers would have been sure to say this is nothing but obvious magic
they say why is not an angel sent down to him if we did send down an angel the matter would be settled at once and no respite would be granted them.
if we had made it an angel we should have sent him as a man and we should certainly have caused them confusion in a matter which they have already covered with confusion.
mocked were many messengers before thee but their scoffers were hemmed in by the thing that they mocked.
say travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who rejected truth.
say to whom belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth say to allah. he hath inscribed for himself the rule of mercy. that he will gather you together for the day of judgment there is no doubt whatever. it is they who have lost their own souls that will not believe.
to him belongeth all that dwelleth or lurketh in the night and the day. for he is the one who heareth and knoweth all things.
say shall i take for my protector any other than allah the maker of the heavens and the earth and he it is that feedeth but is not fed. say nay but i am commanded to be the first of those who bow to allah in islam and be not thou of the company of those who join gods with allah.
say i would if i disobeyed my lord indeed have fear of the penalty of a mighty day.
on that day if the penalty is averted from any it is due to allahxbs mercy and that would be salvation the obvious fulfilment of all desire.
if allah touch thee with affliction none can remove it but he if he touch thee with happiness he hath power over all things.
he is the irresistible watching from above over his worshippers and he is the wise acquainted with all things.
say what thing is most weighty in evidence say allah is witness between me and you this qurxban hath been revealed to me by inspiration that i may warn you and all whom it reaches. can ye possibly bear witness that besides allah there is another allah say nay i cannot bear witness say but in truth he is the one allah and i truly am innocent of your blasphemy of joining others with him.
those to whom we have given the book know this as they know their own sons. those who have lost their own souls refuse therefore to believe.
who doth more wrong than he who inventeth a lie against allah or rejecteth his signs but verily the wrongdoers never shall prosper.
one day shall we gather them all together we shall say to those who ascribed partners to us where are the partners whom ye invented and talked about
there will then be left no subterfuge for them but to say by allah our lord we were not those who joined gods with allah.
behold how they lie against their own souls but the lie which they invented will leave them in the lurch.
of them there are some who pretend to listen to thee but we have thrown veils on their hearts so they understand it not and deafness in their ears if they saw every one of the signs not they will believe in them in so much that when they come to thee they but dispute with thee the unbelievers say these are nothing but tales of the ancients.
others they keep away from it and themselves they keep away but they only destroy their own souls and they perceive it not.
if thou couldst but see when they are confronted with the fire they will say would that we were but sent back then would we not reject the signs of our lord but would be amongst those who believe
yea in their own eyes will become manifest what before they concealed. but if they were returned they would certainly relapse to the things they were forbidden for they are indeed liars.
and they sometimes say there is nothing except our life on this earth and never shall we be raised up again.
if thou couldst but see when they are confronted with their lord he will say is not this the truth they will say yea by our lord he will say taste ye then the penalty because ye rejected faith.
lost indeed are they who treat it as a falsehood that they must meet allahname and they say ah woe unto us that we took no thought of it for they bear their burdens on their backs and evil indeed are the burdens that they bear
what is the life of this world but play and amusement but best is the home in the hereafter for those who are righteous. will ye not then understand
we know indeed the grief which their words do cause thee it is not thee they reject it is the signs of allah which the wicked contemn.
rejected were the messengers before thee with patience and constancy they bore their rejection and their wrongs until our aid did reach them there is none that can alter the words and decrees of allah. already hast thou received some account of those messengers.
if their spurning is hard on thy mind yet if thou wert able to seek a tunnel in the ground or a ladder to the skies and bring them a sign what good. if it were allahxbs will he could gather them together unto true guidance so be not thou amongst those who are swayed by ignorance and impatience
those who listen in truth be sure will accept as to the dead allah will raise them up then will they be turned unto him.
they say why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord say allah hath certainly power to send down a sign but most of them understand not.
there is not an animal that lives on the earth nor a being that flies on its wings but forms part of communities like you. nothing have we omitted from the book and they all shall be gathered to their lord in the end.
those who reject our signs are deaf and dumbname he leaveth to wander whom he willeth he placeth on the way that is straight.
say think ye to yourselves if there come upon you the wrath of allah or the hour that ye dread would ye then call upon other than allah reply if ye are truthful
nayname and if it be his will he would remove the distress which occasioned your call upon him and ye would forget the false gods which ye join with him
before thee we sent messengers to many nations and we afflicted the nations with suffering and adversity that they might learn humility.
when the suffering reached them from us why then did they not learn humility on the contrary their hearts became hardened and satan made their sinful acts seem alluring to them.
but when they forgot the warning they had received we opened to them the gates of all good things until in the midst of their enjoyment of our gifts on a sudden we called them to account when lo they were plunged in despair
of the wrongdoers the last remnant was cut off. praise be to allah the cherisher of the worlds.
say think ye if allah took away your hearing and your sight and sealed up your hearts who  a god other than allah  could restore them to you see how we explain the signs by various symbols yet they turn aside.
say think ye if the punishment of allah comes to you whether suddenly or openly will any be destroyed except those who do wrong
we send the messengers only to give good news and to warn so those who believe and mend their livesname nor shall they grieve.
but those who reject our signsname for that they ceased not from transgressing.
say i tell you not that with me are the treasures of allah nor do i know what is hidden nor do i tell you i am an angel. i but follow what is revealed to me. say can the blind be held equal to the seeing will ye then consider not
give this warning to those in whose hearts is the fear that they will be brought to judgment before their lord except for him they will have no protector nor intercessor that they may guard against evil.
send not away those who call on their lord morning and evening seeking his face. in naught art thou accountable for them and in naught are they accountable for thee that thou shouldst turn them away and thus be one of the unjust.
thus did we try some of them by comparison with others that they should say is it these then that allah hath favoured from amongst us doth not allah know best those who are grateful
when those come to thee who believe in our signs say peace be on you your lord hath inscribed for himself the rule of mercy verily if any of you did evil in ignorance and thereafter repented and amend his conduct lo he is oftforgiving most merciful.
thus do we explain the signs in detail that the way of the sinners may be shown up.
say i am forbidden to worship those  others than allah  whom ye call upon. say i will not follow your wain desires if i did i would stray from the path and be not of the company of those who receive guidance.
say for me i work on a clear sign from my lord but ye reject him. what ye would see hastened is not in my power. the command rests with none but allah he declares the truth and he is the best of judges.
say if what ye would see hastened were in my power the matter would be settled at once between you and me. but allah knoweth best those who do wrong.
with him are the keys of the unseen the treasures that none knoweth but he. he knoweth whatever there is on the earth and in the sea. not a leaf doth fall but with his knowledge there is not a grain in the darkness or depths of the earth nor anything fresh or dry green or withered but is inscribed in a record clear to those who can read.
it is he who doth take your souls by night and hath knowledge of all that ye have done by day by day doth he raise you up again that a term appointed be fulfilled in the end unto him will be your return then will he show you the truth of all that ye did.
he is the irresistible watching from above over his worshippers and he sets guardians over you. at length when death approaches one of you our angels take his soul and they never fail in their duty.
then are men returned unto allah their protector the only reality is not his the command and he is the swiftest in taking account.
say who is it that delivereth you from the dark recesses of land and sea when ye call upon him in humility and silent terror xbif he only delivers us from these dangers we vow we shall truly show our gratitudexb
say it is allah that delivereth you from these and all other distresses and yet ye worship false gods
say he hath power to send calamities on you from above and below or to cover you with confusion in party strife giving you a taste of mutual vengeance  each from the other. see how we explain the signs by various symbols that they may understand.
but thy people reject this though it is the truth. say not mine is the responsibility for arranging your affairs
for every message is a limit of time and soon shall ye know it.
when thou seest men engaged in vain discourse about our signs turn away from them unless they turn to a different theme. if satan ever makes thee forget then after recollection sit not thou in the company of those who do wrong.
on their account no responsibility falls on the righteous but their duty is to remind them that they may learn to fear allah.
leave alone those who take their religion to be mere play and amusement and are deceived by the life of this world. but proclaim to them this truth that every soul delivers itself to ruin by its own acts it will find for itself no protector or intercessor except allah if it offered every ransom or reparation none will be accepted such is the end of those who deliver themselves to ruin by their own acts they will have for drink only boiling water and for punishment one most grievous for they persisted in rejecting allah.
say shall we indeed call on others besides allahnamename wandering bewildered through the earth his friends calling come to usxb vainly guiding him to the path. say allahxbs guidance is the only guidance and we have been directed to submit ourselves to the lord of the worlds
to establish regular prayers and to fear allah for it is to him that we shall be gathered together.
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in true proportions the day he saith be behold it is. his word is the truth. his will be the dominion the day the trumpet will be blown. he knoweth the unseen as well as that which is open. for he is the wise well acquainted with all things.
lo abraham said to his father azar takest thou idols for gods for i see thee and thy people in manifest error.
so also did we show abraham the power and the laws of the heavens and the earth that he might with understanding have certitude.
when the night covered him over he saw a star he said this is my lord. but when it set he said i love not those that set.
when he saw the moon rising in splendour he said this is my lord. but when the moon set he said unless my lord guide me i shall surely be among those who go astray.
when he saw the sun rising in splendour he said this is my lord this is the greatest of all. but when the sun set he said o my people i am indeed free from your guilt of giving partners to allah.
for me i have set my face firmly and truly towards him who created the heavens and the earth and never shall i give partners to allah.
his people disputed with him. he said come ye to dispute with me about allah when he himself hath guided me i fear not the beings ye associate with allah unless my lord willeth nothing can happen. my lord comprehendeth in his knowledge all things. will ye not yourselves be admonished
how should i fear the beings ye associate with allah when ye fear not to give partners to allah without any warrant having been given to you which of us two parties hath more right to security tell me if ye know.
it is those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong  that are truly in security for they are on right guidance.
that was the reasoning about us which we gave to abraham to use against his people we raise whom we will degree after degree for thy lord is full of wisdom and knowledge.
we gave him isaac and jacob all three guided and before him we guided noah and among his progeny david solomon job joseph moses and aaron thus do we reward those who do good
and zakariya and john and jesus and elias all in the ranks of the righteous
and ismaxbil and elisha and jonas and lot and to all we gave favour above the nations
to them and to their fathers and progeny and brethren we chose them and we guided them to a straight way.
this is the guidance of allah he giveth that guidance to whom he pleaseth of his worshippers. if they were to join other gods with him all that they did would be vain for them.
these were the men to whom we gave the book and authority and prophethood if these their descendants reject them behold we shall entrust their charge to a new people who reject them not.
those were the prophets who received allahxbs guidance copy the guidance they received say no reward for this do i ask of you this is no less than a message for the nations.
no just estimate of allah do they make when they say nothing doth allah send down to man by way of revelation say who then sent down the book which moses brought a light and guidance to man but ye make it into separate sheets for show while ye conceal much of its contents therein were ye taught that which ye knew not neither ye nor your fathers. say allah sent it down then leave them to plunge in vain discourse and trifling.
and this is a book which we have sent down bringing blessings and confirming the revelations which came before it that thou mayest warn the mother of cities and all around her. those who believe in the hereafter believe in this book and they are constant in guarding their prayers.
who can be more wicked than one who inventeth a lie against allah or saith i have received inspiration when he hath received none or again who saith i can reveal the like of what allah hath revealed if thou couldst but see how the wicked do fare in the flood of confusion at death  the angels stretch forth their hands sayingyield up your souls this day shall ye receive your reward a penalty of shame for that ye used to tell lies against allah and scornfully to reject of his signs
and behold ye come to us bare and alone as we created you for the first time ye have left behind you all the favours which we bestowed on you we see not with you your intercessors whom ye thought to be partners in your affairs so now all relations between you have been cut off and your pet fancies have left you in the lurch
it is allah who causeth the seedgrain and the datestone to split and sprout. he causeth the living to issue from the dead and he is the one to cause the dead to issue from the living. that is allah then how are ye deluded away from the truth
he it is that cleaveth the daybreak from the dark he makes the night for rest and tranquillity and the sun and moon for the reckoning of time such is the judgment and ordering of him the exalted in power the omniscient.
it is he who maketh the stars as beacons for you that ye may guide yourselves with their help through the dark spaces of land and sea we detail our signs for people who know.
it is he who hath produced you from a single person here is a place of sojourn and a place of departure we detail our signs for people who understand.
it is he who sendeth down rain from the skies with it we produce vegetation of all kinds from some we produce green crops out of which we produce grain heaped up at harvest out of the datepalm and its sheaths or spathes come clusters of dates hanging low and near and then there are gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates each similar in kind yet different in variety when they begin to bear fruit feast your eyes with the fruit and the ripeness thereof. behold in these things there are signs for people who believe.
yet they make the jinns equals with allah though allah did create the jinns and they falsely having no knowledge attribute to him sons and daughters. praise and glory be to him for he is above what they attribute to him
to him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth how can he have a son when he hath no consort he created all things and he hath full knowledge of all things.
that is allah your lord there is no god but he the creator of all things then worship ye him and he hath power to dispose of all affairs.
no vision can grasp him but his grasp is over all vision he is above all comprehension yet is acquainted with all things.
now have come to you from your lord proofs to open your eyes if any will see it will be for the good of his own soul if any will be blind it will be to his own harm i am not here to watch over your doings.
thus do we explain the signs by various symbols that they may say thou hast taught us diligently and that we may make the matter clear to those who know.
follow what thou art taught by inspiration from thy lord there is no god but he and turn aside from those who join gods with allah.
if it had been allahxbs plan they would not have taken false gods but we made thee not one to watch over their doings nor art thou set over them to dispose of their affairs.
revile not ye those whom they call upon besides allah lest they out of spite revile allah in their ignorance. thus have we made alluring to each people its own doings. in the end will they return to their lord and we shall then tell them the truth of all that they did.
they swear their strongest oaths by allah that if a special sign came to them by it they would believe. say certainly all signs are in the power of allah but what will make you muslims realise that even if special signs came they will not believe.
we too shall turn to confusion their hearts and their eyes even as they refused to believe in this in the first instance we shall leave them in their trespasses to wander in distraction.
even if we did send unto them angels and the dead did speak unto them and we gathered together all things before their very eyes they are not the ones to believe unless it is in allahxbs plan. but most of them ignore the truth.
likewise did we make for every messenger an enemyname inspiring each other with flowery discourses by way of deception. if thy lord had so planned they would not have done it so leave them and their inventions alone.
to such deceit let the hearts of those incline who have no faith in the hereafter let them delight in it and let them earn from it what they may.
say shall i seek for judge other than allah  when he it is who hath sent unto you the book explained in detail. they know full well to whom we have given the book that it hath been sent down from thy lord in truth. never be then of those who doubt.
the word of thy lord doth find its fulfilment in truth and in justice none can change his words for he is the one who heareth and knoweth all.
wert thou to follow the common run of those on earth they will lead thee away from the way of allah. they follow nothing but conjecture they do nothing but lie.
thy lord knoweth best who strayeth from his way he knoweth best who they are that receive his guidance.
so eat of meats on which allahxbs name hath been pronounced if ye have faith in his signs.
why should ye not eat of meats on which allahxbs name hath been pronounced when he hath explained to you in detail what is forbidden to you  except under compulsion of necessity but many do mislead men by their appetites unchecked by knowledge. thy lord knoweth best those who transgress.
eschew all sin open or secret those who earn sin will get due recompense for their earnings.
eat not of meats on which allahxbs name hath not been pronounced that would be impiety. but the evil ones ever inspire their friends to contend with you if ye were to obey them ye would indeed be pagans.
can he who was dead to whom we gave life and a light whereby he can walk amongst men be like him who is in the depths of darkness from which he can never come out thus to those without faith their own deeds seem pleasing.
thus have we placed leaders in every town its wicked men to plot and burrow therein but they only plot against their own souls and they perceive it not.
when there comes to them a sign from allah they say we shall not believe until we receive one exactly like those received by allahxbs messengers. allah knoweth best where and how to carry out his mission. soon will the wicked be overtaken by humiliation before allah and a severe punishment for all their plots.
those whom allah in his plan willeth to guide he openeth their breast to islam those whom he willeth to leave strayingname as if they had to climb up to the skies thus doth allah heap the penalty on those who refuse to believe.
this is the way of thy lord leading straight we have detailed the signs for those who receive admonition.
for them will be a home of peace in the presence of their lord he will be their friend because they practised righteousness.
one day will he gather them all together and say o ye assembly of jinns much toll did ye take of men. their friends amongst men will say our lord we made profit from each other but alas we reached our term  which thou didst appoint for us. he will say the fire be your dwellingplace you will dwell therein for ever except as allah willeth. for thy lord is full of wisdom and knowledge.
thus do we make the wrongdoers turn to each other because of what they earn.
o ye assembly of jinns and men came there not unto you messengers from amongst you setting forth unto you my signs and warning you of the meeting of this day of yours they will say we bear witness against ourselves. it was the life of this world that deceived them. so against themselves will they bear witness that they rejected faith.
the messengers were sent thus for thy lord would not destroy for their wrongdoing menxbs habitations whilst their occupants were unwarned.
to all are degrees or ranks according to their deeds for thy lord is not unmindful of anything that they do.
thy lord is selfsufficient full of mercy if it were his will he could destroy you and in your place appoint whom he will as your successors even as he raised you up from the posterity of other people.
all that hath been promised unto you will come to pass nor can ye frustrate it in the least bit.
say o my people do whatever ye can i will do my part soon will ye know who it is whose end will be best in the hereafter certain it is that the wrongdoers will not prosper.
out of what allah hath produced in abundance in tilth and in cattle they assigned him a share they say according to their fancies this is for allah and this  for our partners but the share of their partners reacheth not allah whilst the share of allah reacheth their partners  evil and unjust is their assignment
even so in the eyes of most of the pagans their partners made alluring the slaughter of their children in order to lead them to their own destruction and cause confusion in their religion. if allah had willed they would not have done so but leave alone them and their inventions.
and they say that such and such cattle and crops are taboo and none should eat of them except those whom  so they say  we wish further there are cattle forbidden to yoke or burden and cattle on which at slaughter the name of allah is not pronounced  inventions against allahxbs name soon will he requite them for their inventions.
they say what is in the wombs of such and such cattle is specially reserved for food for our men and forbidden to our women but if it is stillborn then all have share therein. for their false attribution of superstitions to allah he will soon punish them for he is full of wisdom and knowledge.
lost are those who slay their children from folly without knowledge and forbid food which allah hath provided for them inventing lies against allah. they have indeed gone astray and heeded no guidance.
it is he who produceth gardens with trellises and without and dates and tilth with produce of all kinds and olives and pomegranates similar in kind and different in variety eat of their fruit in their season but render the dues that are proper on the day that the harvest is gathered. but waste not by excess for allah loveth not the wasters.
of the cattle are some for burden and some for meat eat what allah hath provided for you and follow not the footsteps of satan for he is to you and avowed enemy.
take eight head of cattle in four pairs of sheep a pair and of goats a pair say hath he forbidden the two males or the two females or the young which the wombs of the two females enclose tell me with knowledge if ye are truthful
of camels a pair and oxen a pair say hath he forbidden the two males or the two females or the young which the wombs of the two females enclose  were ye present when allah ordered you such a thing but who doth more wrong than one who invents a lie against allah to lead astray men without knowledge for allah guideth not people who do wrong.
say i find not in the message received by me by inspiration any meat forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it unless it be dead meat or blood poured forth or the flesh of swinename what is impious meat on which a name has been invoked other than allahxbs. but even so if a person is forced by necessity without wilful disobedience nor transgressing due limitsname most merciful.
for those who followed the jewish law we forbade every animal with undivided hoof and we forbade them that fat of the ox and the sheep except what adheres to their backs or their entrails or is mixed up with a bone this in recompense for their wilful disobedience for we are true in our ordinances.
if they accuse thee of falsehood say your lord is full of mercy allembracing but from people in guilt never will his wrath be turned back.
those who give partners to allah will say if allah had wished we should not have given partners to him nor would our fathers nor should we have had any taboos. so did their ancestors argue falsely until they tasted of our wrath. say have ye any certain knowledge if so produce it before us. ye follow nothing but conjecture ye do nothing but lie.
say with allah is the argument that reaches home if it had been his will he could indeed have guided you all.
say bring forward your witnesses to prove that allah did forbid so and so. if they bring such witnesses be not thou amongst them nor follow thou the vain desires of such as treat our signs as falsehoods and such as believe not in the hereafter for they hold others as equal with their guardianlord.
say come i will rehearse what allah hath really prohibited you from join not anything as equal with him be good to your parents kill not your children on a plea of want we provide sustenance for you and for them come not nigh to shameful deeds. whether open or secret take not life which allah hath made sacred except by way of justice and law thus doth he command you that ye may learn wisdom.
and come not nigh to the orphanxbs property except to improve it until he attain the age of full strength give measure and weight with full justice no burden do we place on any soul but that which it can bear whenever ye speak speak justly even if a near relative is concerned and fulfil the covenant of allah thus doth he command you that ye may remember.
verily this is my way leading straight follow it follow not other paths they will scatter you about from his great path thus doth he command you. that ye may be righteous.
moreover we gave moses the book completing our favour to those who would do right and explaining all things in detailname that they might believe in the meeting with their lord.
and this is a book which we have revealed as a blessing so follow it and be righteous that ye may receive mercy
lest ye should say the book was sent down to two peoples before us and for our part we remained unacquainted with all that they learned by assiduous study
or lest ye should say if the book had only been sent down to us we should have followed its guidance better than they. now then hath come unto you a clear sign from your lordname and turneth away therefrom in good time shall we requite those who turn away from our signs with a dreadful penalty for their turning away.
are they waiting to see if the angels come to them or thy lord himself or certain of the signs of thy lord the day that certain of the signs of thy lord do come no good will it do to a soul to believe in them then if it believed not before nor earned righteousness through its faith. say wait ye we too are waiting.
as for those who divide their religion and break up into sects thou hast no part in them in the least their affair is with allah he will in the end tell them the truth of all that they did.
he that doeth good shall have ten times as much to his credit he that doeth evil shall only be recompensed according to his evil no wrong shall be done unto any of them.
say verily my lord hath guided me to a way that is straightname the path trod by abraham the true in faith and he certainly joined not gods with allah.
say truly my prayer and my service of sacrifice my life and my death are all for allah the cherisher of the worlds
no partner hath he this am i commanded and i am the first of those who bow to his will.
say shall i seek for my cherisher other than allah when he is the cherisher of all things that exist every soul draws the meed of its acts on none but itself no bearer of burdens can bear of burdens can bear the burden of another. your goal in the end is towards allah he will tell you the truth of the things wherein ye disputed.
it is he who hath made you his agents inheritors of the earth he hath raised you in ranks some above others that he may try you in the gifts he hath given you for thy lord is quick in punishment yet he is indeed oftforgiving most merciful.
alif lam mim sad.
a book revealed unto theename that with it thou mightest warn the erring and teach the believers.
follow o men the revelation given unto you from your lord and follow not as friends or protectors other than him. little it is ye remember of admonition.
how many towns have we destroyed for their sins our punishment took them on a sudden by night or while they slept for their afternoon rest.
when thus our punishment took them no cry did they utter but this indeed we did wrong.
then shall we question those to whom our message was sent and those by whom we sent it.
and verily we shall recount their whole story with knowledge for we were never absent at any time or place.
the balance that day will be true to nicety those whose scale of good will be heavy will prosper
those whose scale will be light will be their souls in perdition for that they wrongfully treated our signs.
it is we who have placed you with authority on earth and provided you therein with means for the fulfilment of your life small are the thanks that ye give
it is we who created you and gave you shape then we bade the angels prostrate to adam and they prostrate not so iblis he refused to be of those who prostrate.
allah said what prevented thee from prostrating when i commanded thee he said i am better than he thou didst create me from fire and him from clay.
allah said get thee down from this it is not for thee to be arrogant here get out for thou art of the meanest of creatures.
he said give me respite till the day they are raised up.
allah said be thou among those who have respite.
he said because thou hast thrown me out of the way lo i will lie in wait for them on thy straight way
then will i assault them from before them and behind them from their right and their left nor wilt thou find in most of them gratitude for thy mercies.
allah said get out from this disgraced and expelled. if any of them follow theename
o adam dwell thou and thy wife in the garden and enjoy its good things as ye wish but approach not this tree or ye run into harm and transgression.
then began satan to whisper suggestions to them bringing openly before their minds all their shame that was hidden from them before he said your lord only forbade you this tree lest ye should become angels or such beings as live for ever.
and he swore to them both that he was their sincere adviser.
so by deceit he brought about their fall when they tasted of the tree their shame became manifest to them and they began to sew together the leaves of the garden over their bodies. and their lord called unto them did i not forbid you that tree and tell you that satan was an avowed enemy unto you
they said our lord we have wronged our own souls if thou forgive us not and bestow not upon us thy mercy we shall certainly be lost.
allah said get ye down. with enmity between yourselves. on earth will be your dwellingplace and your means of livelihood for a time.
he said therein shall ye live and therein shall ye die but from it shall ye be taken out at last.
o ye children of adam we have bestowed raiment upon you to cover your shame as well as to be an adornment to you. but the raiment of righteousnessname that they may receive admonition
o ye children of adam let not satan seduce you in the same manner as he got your parents out of the garden stripping them of their raiment to expose their shame for he and his tribe watch you from a position where ye cannot see them we made the evil ones friends only to those without faith.
when they do aught that is shameful they say we found our fathers doing so and allah commanded us thus say nay allah never commands what is shameful do ye say of allah what ye know not
say my lord hath commanded justice and that ye set your whole selves to him at every time and place of prayer and call upon him making your devotion sincere as in his sight such as he created you in the beginning so shall ye return.
some he hath guided others have by their choice deserved the loss of their way in that they took the evil ones in preference to allah for their friends and protectors and think that they receive guidance.
o children of adam wear your beautiful apparel at every time and place of prayer eat and drink but waste not by excess for allah loveth not the wasters.
say who hath forbidden the beautiful gifts of allah which he hath produced for his servants and the things clean and pure which he hath provided for sustenance say they are in the life of this world for those who believe and purely for them on the day of judgment. thus do we explain the signs in detail for those who understand.
say the things that my lord hath indeed forbidden are shameful deeds whether open or secret sins and trespasses against truth or reason assigning of partners to allah for which he hath given no authority and saying things about allah of which ye have no knowledge.
to every people is a term appointed when their term is reached not an hour can they cause delay nor an hour can they advance it in anticipation.
o ye children of adam whenever there come to you messengers from amongst you rehearsing my signs unto younamename
but those who reject our signs and treat them with arrogancename to dwell therein for ever.
who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah or rejects his signs for such their portion appointed must reach them from the book of decrees until when our messengers of death arrive and take their souls they say where are the things that ye used to invoke besides allah they will reply they have left us in the lurch and they will bear witness against themselves that they had rejected allah.
he will say enter ye in the company of the peoples who passed away before you  men and jinns  into the fire. every time a new people enters it curses its sisterpeople that went before until they follow each other all into the fire. saith the last about the first our lord it is these that misled us so give them a double penalty in the fire. he will say doubled for all  but this ye do not understand.
then the first will say to the last see then no advantage have ye over us so taste ye of the penalty for all that ye did 
to those who reject our signs and treat them with arrogance no opening will there be of the gates of heaven nor will they enter the garden until the camel can pass through the eye of the needle such is our reward for those in sin.
for them there is hell as a couch below and folds and folds of covering above such is our requital of those who do wrong.
but those who believe and work righteousnessname but that which it can bearname therein to dwell for ever.
and we shall remove from their hearts any lurking sense of injury beneath them will be rivers flowing and they shall say praise be to allah who hath guided us to this felicity never could we have found guidance had it not been for the guidance of allah indeed it was the truth that the messengers of our lord brought unto us. and they shall hear the cry behold the garden before you ye have been made its inheritors for your deeds of righteousness.
the companions of the garden will call out to the companions of the fire we have indeed found the promises of our lord to us true have you also found your lordxbs promises true they shall say yes but a crier shall proclaim between them the curse of allah is on the wrongdoers
those who would hinder men from the path of allah and would seek in it something crooked they were those who denied the hereafter.
between them shall be a veil and on the heights will be men who would know every one by his marks they will call out to the companions of the garden peace on you they will not have entered but they will have an assurance thereof.
when their eyes shall be turned towards the companions of the fire they will say our lord send us not to the company of the wrongdoers.
the men on the heights will call to certain men whom they will know from their marks saying of what profit to you were your hoards and your arrogant ways
behold are these not the men whom you swore that allah with his mercy would never bless enter ye the garden no fear shall be on you nor shall ye grieve.
the companions of the fire will call to the companions of the garden pour down to us water or anything that allah doth provide for your sustenance. they will say both these things hath allah forbidden to those who rejected him.
such as took their religion to be mere amusement and play and were deceived by the life of the world. that day shall we forget them as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs and as they were wont to reject our signs.
for we had certainly sent unto them a book based on knowledge which we explained in detailname
do they just wait for the final fulfilment of the event on the day the event is finally fulfilled those who disregarded it before will say the messengers of our lord did indeed bring true tidings. have we no intercessors now to intercede on our behalf or could we be sent back then should we behave differently from our behaviour in the past. in fact they will have lost their souls and the things they invented will leave them in the lurch.
your guardianlord is allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days and is firmly established on the throne of authority he draweth the night as a veil oxber the day each seeking the other in rapid succession he created the sun the moon and the stars all governed by laws under his command. is it not his to create and to govern blessed be allah the cherisher and sustainer of the worlds
call on your lord with humility and in private for allah loveth not those who trespass beyond bounds.
do no mischief on the earth after it hath been set in order but call on him with fear and longing in your hearts for the mercy of allah is always near to those who do good.
it is he who sendeth the winds like heralds of glad tidings going before his mercy when they have carried the heavyladen clouds we drive them to a land that is dead make rain to descend thereon and produce every kind of harvest therewith thus shall we raise up the dead perchance ye may remember.
from the land that is clean and good by the will of its cherisher springs up produce rich after its kind but from the land that is bad springs up nothing but that which is niggardly thus do we explain the signs by various symbols to those who are grateful.
we sent noah to his people. he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him. i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day
the leaders of his people said ah we see thee evidently wandering in mind.
he said o my people no wandering is there in my mind on the contrary i am a messenger from the lord and cherisher of the worlds
i but fulfil towards you the duties of my lordxbs mission sincere is my advice to you and i know from allah something that ye know not.
do ye wonder that there hath come to you a message from your lord through a man of your own people to warn you so that ye may fear allah and haply receive his mercy
but they rejected him and we delivered him and those with him in the ark but we overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected our signs. they were indeed a blind people
to the xbad people we sent hud one of their own brethren he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him will ye not fear allah
the leaders of the unbelievers among his people said ah we see thou art an imbecile and we think thou art a liar
he said o my people i am no imbecile but i am a messenger from the lord and cherisher of the worlds
i but fulfil towards you the duties of my lordxbs mission i am to you a sincere and trustworthy adviser.
do ye wonder that there hath come to you a message from your lord through a man of your own people to warn you call in remembrance that he made you inheritors after the people of noah and gave you a stature tall among the nations. call in remembrance the benefits ye have received from allah that so ye may prosper.
they said comest thou to us that we may worship allah alone and give up the cult of our fathers bring us what thou threatenest us with if so be that thou tellest the truth
he said punishment and wrath have already come upon you from your lord dispute ye with me over names which ye have devised  ye and your fathersname also waiting.
we saved him and those who adhered to him. by our mercy and we cut off the roots of those who rejected our signs and did not believe.
to the thamud people we sent salih one of their own brethren he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him. now hath come unto you a clear sign from your lord this shecamel of allah is a sign unto you so leave her to graze in allahxbs earth and let her come to no harm or ye shall be seized with a grievous punishment.
and remember how he made you inheritors after the xbad people and gave you habitations in the land ye build for yourselves palaces and castles in open plains and care out homes in the mountains so bring to remembrance the benefits ye have received from allah and refrain from evil and mischief on the earth.
the leaders of the arrogant party among his people said to those who were reckoned powerless  those among them who believed know ye indeed that salih is a messenger from his lord they said we do indeed believe in the revelation which hath been sent through him.
the arrogant party said for our part we reject what ye believe in.
then they hamstrung the shecamel and insolently defied the order of their lord saying o salih bring about thy threats if thou art a messenger of allah
so the earthquake took them unawares and they lay prostrate in their homes in the morning
so salih left them saying o my people i did indeed convey to you the message for which i was sent by my lord i gave you good counsel but ye love not good counsellors
we also sent lut he said to his people do ye commit lewdness such as no people in creation ever committed before you
for ye practise your lusts on men in preference to women  ye are indeed a people transgressing beyond bounds.
and his people gave no answer but this they said drive them out of your city these are indeed men who want to be clean and pure
but we saved him and his family except his wife she was of those who legged behind.
and we rained down on them a shower of brimstone then see what was the end of those who indulged in sin and crime
to the madyan people we sent shuxbaib one of their own brethren he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him. now hath come unto you a clear sign from your lord give just measure and weight nor withhold from the people the things that are their due and do no mischief on the earth after it has been set in order that will be best for you if ye have faith.
and squat not on every road breathing threats hindering from the path of allah those who believe in him and seeking in it something crooked but remember how ye were little and he gave you increase. and hold in your mindxbs eye what was the end of those who did mischief.
and if there is a party among you who believes in the message with which i have been sent and a party which does not believe hold yourselves in patience until allah doth decide between us for he is the best to decide.
the leaders the arrogant party among his people said o shuxbaib we shall certainly drive thee out of our city  thee and those who believe with thee or else ye thou and they shall have to return to our ways and religion. he said what even though we do detest them
we should indeed invent a lie against allah if we returned to your ways after allah hath rescued us therefrom nor could we by any manner of means return thereto unless it be as in the will and plan of allah our lord. our lord can reach out to the utmost recesses of things by his knowledge. in the allah is our trust. our lord decide thou between us and our people in truth for thou art the best to decide.
the leaders the unbelievers among his people said if ye follow shuxbaib be sure then ye are ruined
but the earthquake took them unawares and they lay prostrate in their homes before the morning
the men who reject shuxbaib became as if they had never been in the homes where they had flourished the men who rejected shuxbaib  it was they who were ruined
so shuxbaib left them saying o my people i did indeed convey to you the messages for which i was sent by my lord i gave you good counsel but how shall i lament over a people who refuse to believe
whenever we sent a prophet to a town we took up its people in suffering and adversity in order that they might learn humility.
then we changed their suffering into prosperity until they grew and multiplied and began to say our fathers too were touched by suffering and affluence ... behold we called them to account of a sudden while they realised not their peril.
if the people of the towns had but believed and feared allah we should indeed have opened out to them all kinds of blessings from heaven and earth but they rejected the truth and we brought them to book for their misdeeds.
did the people of the towns feel secure against the coming of our wrath by night while they were asleep
or else did they feel secure against its coming in broad daylight while they played about carefree
did they then feel secure against the plan of allah but no one can feel secure from the plan of allah except those doomed to ruin
to those who inherit the earth in succession to its previous possessors is it not a guiding lesson that if we so willed we could punish them too for their sins and seal up their hearts so that they could not hear
such were the towns whose story we thus relate unto thee there came indeed to them their messengers with clear signs but they would not believe what they had rejected before. thus doth allah seal up the hearts of those who reject faith.
most of them we found not men true to their covenant but most of them we found rebellious and disobedient.
then after them we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs but they wrongfully rejected them so see what was the end of those who made mischief.
moses said o pharaoh i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds
one for whom it is right to say nothing but truth about allah. now have i come unto you people from your lord with a clear sign so let the children of israel depart along with me.
pharaoh said if indeed thou hast come with a sign show it forth if thou tellest the truth.
then moses threw his rod and behold it was a serpent plain for all to see
and he drew out his hand and behold it was white to all beholders
said the chiefs of the people of pharaoh this is indeed a sorcerer wellversed.
his plan is to get you out of your land then what is it ye counsel
they said keep him and his brother in suspense for a while and send to the cities men to collect
and bring up to thee all our sorcerers wellversed.
so there came the sorcerers to pharaoh they said of course we shall have a suitable reward if we win
he said yea and more for ye shall in that case be raised to posts nearest to my person.
they said o moses wilt thou throw first or shall we have the first throw
said moses throw ye first. so when they threw they bewitched the eyes of the people and struck terror into them for they showed a great feat of magic.
we put it into mosesxbs mind by inspiration throw now thy rodand behold it swallows up straight away all the falsehoods which they fake
thus truth was confirmed and all that they did was made of no effect.
so the great ones were vanquished there and then and were made to look small.
but the sorcerers fell down prostrate in adoration.
saying we believe in the lord of the worlds
the lord of moses and aaron.
said pharaoh believe ye in him before i give you permission surely this is a trick which ye have planned in the city to drive out its people but soon shall ye know the consequences.
be sure i will cut off your hands and your feet on apposite sides and i will cause you all to die on the cross.
they said for us we are but sent back unto our lord
but thou dost wreak thy vengeance on us simply because we believed in the signs of our lord when they reached us our lord pour out on us patience and constancy and take our souls unto thee as muslims who bow to thy will
said the chiefs of pharaohxbs people wilt thou leave moses and his people to spread mischief in the land and to abandon thee and thy gods he said their male children will we slay only their females will we save alive and we have over them power irresistible.
said moses to his people pray for help from allah and wait in patience and constancy for the earth is allahxbs to give as a heritage to such of his servants as he pleaseth and the end is best for the righteous.
they said we have had nothing but trouble both before and after thou camest to us. he said it may be that your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the earth that so he may try you by your deeds.
we punished the people of pharaoh with years of droughts and shortness of crops that they might receive admonition.
but when good times came they said this is due to us when gripped by calamity they ascribed it to evil omens connected with moses and those with him behold in truth the omens of evil are theirs in allahxbs sight but most of them do not understand
they said to moses whatever be the signs thou bringest to work therewith thy sorcery on us we shall never believe in thee.
so we sent plagues on them wholesale death locusts lice frogs and blood signs openly selfexplained but they were steeped in arrogancename
every time the penalty fell on them they said o moses on your behalf call on thy lord in virtue of his promise to thee if thou wilt remove the penalty from us we shall truly believe in thee and we shall send away the children of israel with thee.
but every time we removed the penalty from them according to a fixed term which they had to fulfil behold they broke their word
so we exacted retribution from them we drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and failed to take warning from them.
and we made a people considered weak and of no account inheritors of lands in both east and west  lands whereon we sent down our blessings. the fair promise of thy lord was fulfilled for the children of israel because they had patience and constancy and we levelled to the ground the great works and fine buildings which pharaoh and his people erected with such pride.
we took the children of israel with safety across the sea. they came upon a people devoted entirely to some idols they had. they said o moses fashion for us a god like unto the gods they have. he said surely ye are a people without knowledge.
as to these folkname and vain is the worship which they practise.
he said shall i seek for you a god other than the true allah when it is allah who hath endowed you with gifts above the nations
and remember we rescued you from pharaohxbs people who afflicted you with the worst of penalties who slew your male children and saved alive your females in that was a momentous trial from your lord.
we appointed for moses thirty nights and completed the period with ten more thus was completed the term of communion with his lord forty nights. and moses had charged his brother aaron before he went up act for me amongst my people do right and follow not the way of those who do mischief.
when moses came to the place appointed by us and his lord addressed him he said o my lord show thyself to me that i may look upon thee. allah said by no means canst thou see me direct but look upon the mount if it abide in its place then shalt thou see me. when his lord manifested his glory on the mount he made it as dust. and moses fell down in a swoon. when he recovered his senses he said glory be to thee to thee i turn in repentance and i am the first to believe.
allah said o moses i have chosen thee above other men by the mission i have given thee and the words i have spoken to thee take then the revelation which i give thee and be of those who give thanks.
and we ordained laws for him in the tablets in all matters both commanding and explaining all things and said take and hold these with firmness and enjoin thy people to hold fast by the best in the precepts soon shall i show you the homes of the wicked how they lie desolate.
those who behave arrogantly on the earth in defiance of right  them will i turn away from my signs even if they see all the signs they will not believe in them and if they see the way of right conduct they will not adopt it as the way but if they see the way of error that is the way they will adopt. for they have rejected our signs and failed to take warning from them.
those who reject our signs and the meeting in the hereaftername
the people of moses made in his absence out of their ornaments the image of calf for worship it seemed to low did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor show them the way they took it for worship and they did wrong.
when they repented and saw that they had erred they said if our lord have not mercy upon us and forgive us we shall indeed be of those who perish.
when moses came back to his people angry and grieved he said evil it is that ye have done in my place in my absence did ye make haste to bring on the judgment of your lord he put down the tablets seized his brother by the hair of his head and dragged him to him. aaron said son of my mother the people did indeed reckon me as naught and went near to slaying me make not the enemies rejoice over my misfortune nor count thou me amongst the people of sin.
moses prayed o my lord forgive me and my brother admit us to thy mercy for thou art the most merciful of those who show mercy
those who took the calf for worship will indeed be overwhelmed with wrath from their lord and with shame in this life thus do we recompense those who invent falsehoods.
but those who do wrong but repent thereafter and truly believename most merciful.
when the anger of moses was appeased he took up the tablets in the writing thereon was guidance and mercy for such as fear their lord.
and moses chose seventy of his people for our place of meeting when they were seized with violent quaking he prayed o my lord if it had been thy will thou couldst have destroyed long before both them and me wouldst thou destroy us for the deeds of the foolish ones among us this is no more than thy trial by it thou causest whom thou wilt to stray and thou leadest whom thou wilt into the right path. thou art our protector so forgive us and give us thy mercy for thou art the best of those who forgive.
and ordain for us that which is good in this life and in the hereafter for we have turned unto thee. he said with my punishment i visit whom i will but my mercy extendeth to all things. that mercy i shall ordain for those who do right and practise regular charity and those who believe in our signs
those who follow the messenger the unlettered prophet whom they find mentioned in their own scriptures in the law and the gospel for he commands them what is just and forbids them what is evil he allows them as lawful what is good and pure and prohibits them from what is bad and impure he releases them from their heavy burdens and from the yokes  honour him help him and follow the light which is sent down with him it is they who will prosper.
say o men i am sent unto you all as the messenger of allah to whom belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth there is no god but he it is he that giveth both life and death. so believe in allah and his messenger the unlettered prophet who believeth in allah and his words follow him that so ye may be guided.
of the people of moses there is a section who guide and do justice in the light of truth.
we divided them into twelve tribes or nations. we directed moses by inspiration when his thirsty people asked him for water strike the rock with thy staff out of it there gushed forth twelve springs each group knew its own place for water. we gave them the shade of clouds and sent down to them manna and quails saying eat of the good things we have provided for you but they rebelled to us they did no harm but they harmed their own souls.
and remember it was said to them dwell in this town and eat therein as ye wish but say the word of humility and enter the gate in a posture of humility we shall forgive you your faults we shall increase the portion of those who do good.
but the transgressors among them changed the word from that which had been given them so we sent on them a plague from heaven. for that they repeatedly transgressed.
ask them concerning the town standing close by the sea. behold they transgressed in the matter of the sabbath. for on the day of their sabbath their fish did come to them openly holding up their heads but on the day they had no sabbath they came not thus did we make a trial of them for they were given to transgression.
when some of them said why do ye preach to a people whom allah will destroy or visit with a terrible punishment said the preachers to discharge our duty to your lord and perchance they may fear him.
when they disregarded the warnings that had been given them we rescued those who forbade evil but we visited the wrongdoers with a grievous punishment because they were given to transgression.
when in their insolence they transgressed all prohibitions we said to them be ye apes despised and rejected.
behold thy lord did declare that he would send against them to the day of judgment those who would afflict them with grievous penalty. thy lord is quick in retribution but he is also oftforgiving most merciful.
we broke them up into sections on this earth. there are among them some that are the righteous and some that are the opposite. we have tried them with both prosperity and adversity in order that they might turn to us.
after them succeeded an evil generation they inherited the book but they chose for themselves the vanities of this world saying for excuse everything will be forgiven us. even so if similar vanities came their way they would again seize them. was not the covenant of the book taken from them that they would not ascribe to allah anything but the truth and they study what is in the book. but best for the righteous is the home in the hereafter. will ye not understand
as to those who hold fast by the book and establish regular prayername
when we shook the mount over them as if it had been a canopy and they thought it was going to fall on them we said hold firmly to what we have given you and bring ever to remembrance what is therein perchance ye may fear allah.
when thy lord drew forth from the children of adam  from their loins  their descendants and made them testify concerning themselves saying am i not your lord who cherishes and sustains you they said yea we do testify this lest ye should say on the day of judgment of this we were never mindful
or lest ye should say our fathers before us may have taken false gods but we are their descendants after them wilt thou then destroy us because of the deeds of men who were futile
thus do we explain the signs in detail and perchance they may turn unto us.
relate to them the story of the man to whom we sent our signs but he passed them by so satan followed him up and he went astray.
if it had been our will we should have elevated him with our signs but he inclined to the earth and followed his own vain desires. his similitude is that of a dog if you attack him he lolls out his tongue or if you leave him alone he still lolls out his tongue. that is the similitude of those who reject our signs so relate the story perchance they may reflect.
evil as an example are people who reject our signs and wrong their own souls.
whom allah doth guidenamename
many are the jinns and men we have made for hell they have hearts wherewith they understand not eyes wherewith they see not and ears wherewith they hear not. they are like cattle nay more misguided for they are heedless of warning.
the most beautiful names belong to allah so call on him by them but shun such men as use profanity in his names for what they do they will soon be requited.
of those we have created are people who direct others with truth. and dispense justice therewith.
those who reject our signs we shall gradually visit with punishment in ways they perceive not
respite will i grant unto them for my scheme is strong and unfailing.
do they not reflect their companion is not seized with madness he is but a perspicuous warner.
do they see nothing in the government of the heavens and the earth and all that allah hath created do they not see that it may well be that their terms is nigh drawing to an end in what message after this will they then believe
to such as allah rejects from his guidance there can be no guide he will leave them in their trespasses wandering in distraction.
they ask thee about the final hour  when will be its appointed time say the knowledge thereof is with my lord alone none but he can reveal as to when it will occur. heavy were its burden through the heavens and the earth. only all of a sudden will it come to you. they ask thee as if thou wert eager in search thereof say the knowledge thereof is with allah alone but most men know not.
say i have no power over any good or harm to myself except as allah willeth. if i had knowledge of the unseen i should have multiplied all good and no evil should have touched me i am but a warner and a bringer of glad tidings to those who have faith.
it is he who created you from a single person and made his mate of like nature in order that he might dwell with her in love. when they are united she bears a light burden and carries it about unnoticed. when she grows heavy they both pray to allah their lord saying if thou givest us a goodly child we vow we shall ever be grateful.
but when he giveth them a goodly child they ascribe to others a share in the gift they have received but allah is exalted high above the partners they ascribe to him.
do they indeed ascribe to him as partners things that can create nothing but are themselves created
no aid can they give them nor can they aid themselves
if ye call them to guidance they will not obey for you it is the same whether ye call them or ye hold your peace
verily those whom ye call upon besides allah are servants like unto you call upon them and let them listen to your prayer if ye are indeed truthful
have they feet to walk with or hands to lay hold with or eyes to see with or ears to hear with say call your xbgodpartnersxb scheme your worst against me and give me no respite
for my protector is allah who revealed the book from time to time and he will choose and befriend the righteous.
but those ye call upon besides him are unable to help you and indeed to help themselves.
if thou callest them to guidance they hear not. thou wilt see them looking at thee but they see not.
hold to forgiveness command what is right but turn away from the ignorant.
if a suggestion from satan assail thy mind seek refuge with allah for he heareth and knoweth all things.
those who fear allah when a thought of evil from satan assaults them bring allah to remembrance when lo they see aright
but their brethren the evil ones plunge them deeper into error and never relax their efforts.
if thou bring them not a revelation they say why hast thou not got it together say i but follow what is revealed to me from my lord this is nothing but lights from your lord and guidance and mercy for any who have faith.
when the qurxban is read listen to it with attention and hold your peace that ye may receive mercy.
and do thou o reader bring thy lord to remembrance in thy very soul with humility and in reverence without loudness in words in the mornings and evenings and be not thou of those who are unheedful.
those who are near to thy lord disdain not to do him worship they celebrate his praises and prostrate before him.
they ask thee concerning things taken as spoils of war. say such spoils are at the disposal of allah and the messenger so fear allah and keep straight the relations between yourselves obey allah and his messenger if ye do believe.
for believers are those who when allah is mentioned feel a tremor in their hearts and when they hear his signs rehearsed find their faith strengthened and put all their trust in their lord
who establish regular prayers and spend freely out of the gifts we have given them for sustenance
such in truth are the believers they have grades of dignity with their lord and forgiveness and generous sustenance
just as thy lord ordered thee out of thy house in truth even though a party among the believers disliked it
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it was made manifest as if they were being driven to death and they actually saw it.
behold allah promised you one of the two enemy parties that it should be yours ye wished that the one unarmed should be yours but allah willed to justify the truth according to his words and to cut off the roots of the unbelievers
that he might justify truth and prove falsehood false distasteful though it be to those in guilt.
remember ye implored the assistance of your lord and he answered you i will assist you with a thousand of the angels ranks on ranks.
allah made it but a message of hope and an assurance to your hearts in any case there is no help except from allah and allah is exalted in power wise.
remember he covered you with a sort of drowsiness to give you calm as from himself and he caused rain to descend on you from heaven to clean you therewith to remove from you the stain of satan to strengthen your hearts and to plant your feet firmly therewith.
remember thy lord inspired the angels with the message i am with you give firmness to the believers i will instil terror into the hearts of the unbelievers smite ye above their necks and smite all their fingertips off them.
this because they contended against allah and his messenger if any contend against allah and his messenger allah is strict in punishment.
thus will it be said taste ye then of the punishment for those who resist allah is the penalty of the fire.
o ye who believe when ye meet the unbelievers in hostile array never turn your backs to them.
if any do turn his back to them on such a day  unless it be in a stratagem of war or to retreat to a troop of his own he draws on himself the wrath of allah and his abode is hell an evil refuge indeed
it is not ye who slew them it was allah when thou threwest a handful of dust it was not thy act but allahxbs in order that he might test the believers by a gracious trial from himself for allah is he who heareth and knoweth all things.
that and also because allah is he who makes feeble the plans and stratagem of the unbelievers.
o unbelievers if ye prayed for victory and judgment now hath the judgment come to you if ye desist from wrong it will be best for you if ye return to the attack so shall we. not the least good will your forces be to you even if they were multiplied for verily allah is with those who believe
o ye who believe obey allah and his messenger and turn not away from him when ye hear him speak.
nor be like those who say we hear but listen not
for the worst of beasts in the sight of allah are the deaf and the dumb those who understand not.
if allah had found in them any good. he would indeed have made them listen as it is if he had made them listen they would but have turned back and declined faith.
o ye who believe give your response to allah and his messenger when he calleth you to that which will give you life and know that allah cometh in between a man and his heart and that it is he to whom ye shall all be gathered.
and fear tumult or oppression which affecteth not in particular only those of you who do wrong and know that allah is strict in punishment.
call to mind when ye were a small band despised through the land and afraid that men might despoil and kidnap you but he provided a safe asylum for you strengthened you with his aid and gave you good things for sustenance that ye might be grateful.
o ye that believe betray not the trust of allah and the messenger nor misappropriate knowingly things entrusted to you.
and know ye that your possessions and your progeny are but a trial and that it is allah with whom lies your highest reward.
o ye who believe if ye fear allah he will grant you a criterion to judge between right and wrong remove from you all evil that may afflict you and forgive you for allah is the lord of grace unbounded.
remember how the unbelievers plotted against thee to keep thee in bonds or slay thee or get thee out of thy home. they plot and plan and allah too plans but the best of planners is allah.
when our signs are rehearsed to them they say we have heard this before if we wished we could say words like these these are nothing but tales of the ancients.
remember how they said o allah if this is indeed the truth from thee rain down on us a shower of stones form the sky or send us a grievous penalty.
but allah was not going to send them a penalty whilst thou wast amongst them nor was he going to send it whilst they could ask for pardon.
but what plea have they that allah should not punish them when they keep out men from the sacred mosque  and they are not its guardians no men can be its guardians except the righteous but most of them do not understand.
their prayer at the house of allah is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands its only answer can be taste ye the penalty because ye blasphemed.
the unbelievers spend their wealth to hinder man from the path of allah and so will they continue to spend but in the end they will have only regrets and sighs at length they will be overcome and the unbelievers will be gathered together to hell
in order that allah may separate the impure from the pure put the impure one on another heap them together and cast them into hell. they will be the ones to have lost.
say to the unbelievers if now they desist from unbelief their past would be forgiven them but if they persist the punishment of those before them is already a matter of warning for them.
and fight them on until there is no more tumult or oppression and there prevail justice and faith in allah altogether and everywhere but if they cease verily allah doth see all that they do.
if they refuse be sure that allah is your protector  the best to protect and the best to help.
and know that out of all the booty that ye may acquire in war a fifth share is assigned to allahname and to near relatives orphans the needy and the wayfarernamename
remember ye were on the hither side of the valley and they on the farther side and the caravan on lower ground than ye. even if ye had made a mutual appointment to meet ye would certainly have failed in the appointment but thus ye met that allah might accomplish a matter already enacted that those who died might die after a clear sign had been given and those who lived might live after a clear sign had been given. and verily allah is he who heareth and knoweth all things.
remember in thy dream allah showed them to thee as few if he had shown them to thee as many ye would surely have been discouraged and ye would surely have disputed in your decision but allah saved you for he knoweth well the secrets of all hearts.
and remember when ye met he showed them to you as few in your eyes and he made you appear as contemptible in their eyes that allah might accomplish a matter already enacted. for to allah do all questions go back for decision.
o ye who believe when ye meet a force be firm and call allah in remembrance much and often that ye may prosper
and obey allah and his messenger and fall into no disputes lest ye lose heart and your power depart and be patient and persevering for allah is with those who patiently persevere
and be not like those who started from their homes insolently and to be seen of men and to hinder men from the path of allah for allah compasseth round about all that they do.
remember satan made their sinful acts seem alluring to them and said no one among men can overcome you this day while i am near to you but when the two forces came in sight of each other he turned on his heels and said lo i am clear of you lo i see what ye see not lo i fear allah for allah is strict in punishment.
lo the hypocrites say and those in whose hearts is a disease these people their religion has misled them. but if any trust in allah behold allah is exalted in might wise.
if thou couldst see when the angels take the souls of the unbelievers at death how they smite their faces and their backs saying taste the penalty of the blazing fire
because of the deeds which your own hands sent forth for allah is never unjust to his servants
deeds after the manner of the people of pharaoh and of those before them they rejected the signs of allah and allah punished them for their crimes for allah is strong and strict in punishment
because allah will never change the grace which he hath bestowed on a people until they change what is in their own souls and verily allah is he who heareth and knoweth all things.
deeds after the manner of the people of pharaoh and those before them they treated as false the signs of their lord so we destroyed them for their crimes and we drowned the people of pharaoh for they were all oppressors and wrongdoers.
for the worst of beasts in the sight of allah are those who reject him they will not believe.
they are those with whom thou didst make a covenant but they break their covenant every time and they have not the fear of allah.
if ye gain the mastery over them in war disperse with them those who follow them that they may remember.
if thou fearest treachery from any group throw back their covenant to them so as to be on equal terms for allah loveth not the treacherous.
let not the unbelievers think that they can get the better of the godly they will never frustrate them.
against them make ready your strength to the utmost of your power including steeds of war to strike terror into the hearts of the enemies of allah and your enemies and others besides whom ye may not know but whom allah doth know. whatever ye shall spend in the cause of allah shall be repaid unto you and ye shall not be treated unjustly.
but if the enemy incline towards peace do thou also incline towards peace and trust in allah for he is one that heareth and knoweth all things.
should they intend to deceive thee verily allah sufficeth thee he it is that hath strengthened thee with his aid and with the company of the believers
and moreover he hath put affection between their hearts not if thou hadst spent all that is in the earth couldst thou have produced that affection but allah hath done it for he is exalted in might wise.
o prophet sufficient unto thee is allahname
o prophet rouse the believers to the fight. if there are twenty amongst you patient and persevering they will vanquish two hundred if a hundred they will vanquish a thousand of the unbelievers for these are a people without understanding.
for the present allah hath lightened your task for he knoweth that there is a weak spot in you but even so if there are a hundred of you patient and persevering they will vanquish two hundred and if a thousand they will vanquish two thousand with the leave of allah for allah is with those who patiently persevere.
it is not fitting for a prophet that he should have prisoners of war until he hath thoroughly subdued the land. ye look for the temporal goods of this world but allah looketh to the hereafter and allah is exalted in might wise.
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah a severe penalty would have reached you for the ransom that ye took.
but now enjoy what ye took in war lawful and good but fear allah for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o prophet say to those who are captives in your hands if allah findeth any good in your hearts he will give you something better than what has been taken from you and he will forgive you for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
but if they have treacherous designs against thee o messenger they have already been in treason against allah and so hath he given thee power over them. and allah so he who hath full knowledge and wisdom.
those who believed and adopted exile and fought for the faith with their property and their persons in the cause of allah as well as those who gave them asylum and aidname one of another. as to those who believed but came not into exile ye owe no duty of protection to them until they come into exile but if they seek your aid in religion it is your duty to help them except against a people with whom ye have a treaty of mutual alliance. and remember allah seeth all that ye do.
the unbelievers are protectors one of another unless ye do this protect each other there would be tumult and oppression on earth and great mischief.
those who believe and adopt exile and fight for the faith in the cause of allah as well as those who give them asylum and aidname
and those who accept faith subsequently and adopt exile and fight for the faith in your companyname
a declaration of immunity from allah and his messenger to those of the pagans with whom ye have contracted mutual alliances
go ye then for four months backwards and forwards as ye will throughout the land but know ye that ye cannot frustrate allah by your falsehood but that allah will cover with shame those who reject him.
and an announcement from allah and his messenger to the people assembled on the day of the great pilgrimagename ye repent it were best for you but if ye turn away know ye that ye cannot frustrate allah. and proclaim a grievous penalty to those who reject faith.
but the treaties are not dissolved with those pagans with whom ye have entered into alliance and who have not subsequently failed you in aught nor aided any one against you. so fulfil your engagements with them to the end of their term for allah loveth the righteous.
but when the forbidden months are past then fight and slay the pagans wherever ye find them an seize them beleaguer them and lie in wait for them in every stratagem of war but if they repent and establish regular prayers and practise regular charity then open the way for them for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
if one amongst the pagans ask thee for asylum grant it to him so that he may hear the word of allah and then escort him to where he can be secure. that is because they are men without knowledge.
how can there be a league before allah and his messenger with the pagans except those with whom ye made a treaty near the sacred mosque as long as these stand true to you stand ye true to them for allah doth love the righteous.
how can there be such a league seeing that if they get an advantage over you they respect not in you the ties either of kinship or of covenant with fair words from their mouths they entice you but their hearts are averse from you and most of them are rebellious and wicked.
the signs of allah have they sold for a miserable price and many have they hindered from his way evil indeed are the deeds they have done.
in a believer they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant it is they who have transgressed all bounds.
but even so if they repent establish regular prayers and practise regular charityname for those who understand.
but if they violate their oaths after their covenant and taunt you for your faithname
will ye not fight people who violated their oaths plotted to expel the messenger and took the aggressive by being the first to assault you do ye fear them nay it is allah whom ye should more justly fear if ye believe
fight them and allah will punish them by your hands cover them with shame help you to victory over them heal the breasts of believers
and still the indignation of their hearts. for allah will turn in mercy to whom he will and allah is allknowing allwise.
or think ye that ye shall be abandoned as though allah did not know those among you who strive with might and main and take none for friends and protectors except allah his messenger and the community of believers but allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do.
it is not for such as join gods with allah to visit or maintain the mosques of allah while they witness against their own souls to infidelity. the works of such bear no fruit in fire shall they dwell.
the mosques of allah shall be visited and maintained by such as believe in allah and the last day establish regular prayers and practise regular charity and fear none at all except allah. it is they who are expected to be on true guidance.
do ye make the giving of drink to pilgrims or the maintenance of the sacred mosque equal to the pious service of those who believe in allah and the last day and strive with might and main in the cause of allah they are not comparable in the sight of allah and allah guides not those who do wrong.
those who believe and suffer exile and strive with might and main in allahxbs cause with their goods and their persons have the highest rank in the sight of allah they are the people who will achieve salvation.
their lord doth give them glad tidings of a mercy from himself of his good pleasure and of gardens for them wherein are delights that endure
they will dwell therein for ever. verily in allahxbs presence is a reward the greatest of all.
o ye who believe take not for protectors your fathers and your brothers if they love infidelity above faith if any of you do so they do wrong.
say if it be that your fathers your sons your brothers your mates or your kindred the wealth that ye have gained the commerce in which ye fear a decline or the dwellings in which ye delight  are dearer to you than allah or his messenger or the striving in his cause then wait until allah brings about his decision and allah guides not the rebellious.
assuredly allah did help you in many battlefields and on the day of hunain behold your great numbers elated you but they availed you naught the land for all that it is wide did constrain you and ye turned back in retreat.
but allah did pour his calm on the messenger and on the believers and sent down forces which ye saw not he punished the unbelievers thus doth he reward those without faith.
again will allah after this turn in mercy to whom he will for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o ye who believe truly the pagans are unclean so let them not after this year of theirs approach the sacred mosque. and if ye fear poverty soon will allah enrich you if he wills out of his bounty for allah is allknowing allwise.
fight those who believe not in allah nor the last day nor hold that forbidden which hath been forbidden by allah and his messenger nor acknowledge the religion of truth even if they are of the people of the book until they pay the jizya with willing submission and feel themselves subdued.
the jews call xbuzair a son of allah and the christians call christ the son of allah. that is a saying from their mouth in this they but imitate what the unbelievers of old used to say. allahxbs curse be on them how they are deluded away from the truth
they take their priests and their anchorites to be their lords in derogation of allah and they take as their lord christ the son of mary yet they were commanded to worship but one allah there is no god but he. praise and glory to him far is he from having the partners they associate with him.
fain would they extinguish allahxbs light with their mouths but allah will not allow but that his light should be perfected even though the unbelievers may detest it.
it is he who hath sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to proclaim it over all religion even though the pagans may detest it.
o ye who believe there are indeed many among the priests and anchorites who in falsehood devour the substance of men and hinder them from the way of allah. and there are those who bury gold and silver and spend it not in the way of allah announce unto them a most grievous penalty
on the day when heat will be produced out of that wealth in the fire of hell and with it will be branded their foreheads their flanks and their backs their flanks and their backs. this is the treasure which ye buried for yourselves taste ye then the treasures ye buried
the number of months in the sight of allah is twelve in a year so ordained by him the day he created the heavens and the earth of them four are sacred that is the straight usage. so wrong not yourselves therein and fight the pagans all together as they fight you all together. but know that allah is with those who restrain themselves.
verily the transposing of a prohibited month is an addition to unbelief the unbelievers are led to wrong thereby for they make it lawful one year and forbidden another year in order to adjust the number of months forbidden by allah and make such forbidden ones lawful. the evil of their course seems pleasing to them. but allah guideth not those who reject faith.
o ye who believe what is the matter with you that when ye are asked to go forth in the cause of allah ye cling heavily to the earth do ye prefer the life of this world to the hereafter but little is the comfort of this life as compared with the hereafter.
unless ye go forth he will punish you with a grievous penalty and put others in your place but him ye would not harm in the least. for allah hath power over all things.
if ye help not your leader it is no matter for allah did indeed help him when the unbelievers drove him out he had no more than one companion they two were in the cave and he said to his companion have no fear for allah is with us then allah sent down his peace upon him and strengthened him with forces which ye saw not and humbled to the depths the word of the unbelievers. but the word of allah is exalted to the heights for allah is exalted in might wise.
go ye forth whether equipped lightly or heavily and strive and struggle with your goods and your persons in the cause of allah. that is best for you if ye but knew.
if there had been immediate gain in sight and the journey easy they would all without doubt have followed thee but the distance was long and weighed on them. they would indeed swear by allah if we only could we should certainly have come out with you they would destroy their own souls for allah doth know that they are certainly lying.
allah give thee grace why didst thou grant them until those who told the truth were seen by thee in a clear light and thou hadst proved the liars
those who believe in allah and the last day ask thee for no exemption from fighting with their goods and persons. and allah knoweth well those who do their duty.
only those ask thee for exemption who believe not in allah and the last day and whose hearts are in doubt so that they are tossed in their doubts to and fro.
if they had intended to come out they would certainly have made some preparation therefor but allah was averse to their being sent forth so he made them lag behind and they were told sit ye among those who sit inactive.
if they had come out with you they would not have added to your strength but only made for disorder hurrying to and fro in your midst and sowing sedition among you and there would have been some among you who would have listened to them. but allah knoweth well those who do wrong.
indeed they had plotted sedition before and upset matters for thee untilname and the decree of allah became manifest much to their disgust.
among them is many a man who says grant me exemption and draw me not into trial. have they not fallen into trial already and indeed hell surrounds the unbelievers on all sides.
if good befalls thee it grieves them but if a misfortune befalls thee they say we took indeed our precautions beforehand and they turn away rejoicing.
say nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us he is our protector and on allah let the believers put their trust.
say can you expect for us any fate other than one of two glorious things martyrdom or victory but we can expect for you either that allah will send his punishment from himself or by our hands. so wait expectant we too will wait with you.
say spend for the cause willingly or unwillingly not from you will it be accepted for ye are indeed a people rebellious and wicked.
the only reasons why their contributions are not accepted are that they reject allah and his messenger that they come to prayer without earnestness and that they offer contributions unwillingly.
let not their wealth nor their following in sons dazzle thee in reality allahxbs plan is to punish them with these things in this life and that their souls may perish in their very denial of allah.
they swear by allah that they are indeed of you but they are not of you yet they are afraid to appear in their true colours.
if they could find a place to flee to or caves or a place of concealment they would turn straightaway thereto with an obstinate rush.
and among them are men who slander thee in the matter of the distribution of the alms if they are given part thereof they are pleased but if not behold they are indignant
if only they had been content with what allah and his messenger gave them and had said sufficient unto us is allah allah and his messenger will soon give us of his bounty to allah do we turn our hopes that would have been the right course.
alms are for the poor and the needy and those employed to administer the funds for those whose hearts have been recently reconciled to truth for those in bondage and in debt in the cause of allah and for the wayfarer thus is it ordained by allah and allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
among them are men who molest the prophet and say he is all ear. say he listens to what is best for you he believes in allah has faith in the believers and is a mercy to those of you who believe. but those who molest the messenger will have a grievous penalty.
to you they swear by allah. in order to please you but it is more fitting that they should please allah and his messenger if they are believers.
know they not that for those who oppose allah and his messenger is the fire of hell wherein they shall dwell. that is the supreme disgrace.
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down about them showing them what is really passing in their hearts. say mock ye but verily allah will bring to light all that ye fear should be revealed.
if thou dost question them they declare with emphasis we were only talking idly and in play. say was it at allah and his signs and his messenger that ye were mocking
make ye no excuses ye have rejected faith after ye had accepted it. if we pardon some of you we will punish others amongst you for that they are in sin.
the hypocrites men and women have an understanding with each other they enjoin evil and forbid what is just and are close with their hands. they have forgotten allah so he hath forgotten them. verily the hypocrites are rebellious and perverse.
allah hath promised the hypocrites men and women and the rejecters of faith the fire of hell therein shall they dwell sufficient is it for them for them is the curse of allah and an enduring punishment
as in the case of those before you they were mightier than you in power and more flourishing in wealth and children. they had their enjoyment of their portion and ye have of yours as did those before you and ye indulge in idle talk as they did. they their work are fruitless in this world and in the hereafter and they will lose all spiritual good.
hath not the story reached them of those before them the people of noah and xbad and thamud the people of abraham the men of midian and the cities overthrown. to them came their messengers with clear signs. it is not allah who wrongs them but they wrong their own souls.
the believers men and women are protectors one of another they enjoin what is just and forbid what is evil they observe regular prayers practise regular charity and obey allah and his messenger. on them will allah pour his mercy for allah is exalted in power wise.
allah hath promised to believers men and women gardens under which rivers flow to dwell therein and beautiful mansions in gardens of everlasting bliss. but the greatest bliss is the good pleasure of allah that is the supreme felicity.
o prophet strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and be firm against them. their abode is hellname
they swear by allah that they said nothing evil but indeed they uttered blasphemy and they did it after accepting islam and they meditated a plot which they were unable to carry out this revenge of theirs was their only return for the bounty with which allah and his messenger had enriched them if they repent it will be best for them but if they turn back to their evil ways allah will punish them with a grievous penalty in this life and in the hereafter they shall have none on earth to protect or help them.
amongst them are men who made a covenant with allah that if he bestowed on them of his bounty they would give largely in charity and be truly amongst those who are righteous.
but when he did bestow of his bounty they became covetous and turned back from their covenant averse from its fulfilment.
so he hath put as a consequence hypocrisy into their hearts to last till the day whereon they shall meet him because they broke their covenant with allah and because they lied again and again.
know they not that allah doth know their secret thoughts and their secret counsels and that allah knoweth well all things unseen
those who slander such of the believers as give themselves freely to deeds of charity as well as such as can find nothing to give except the fruits of their labournamename
whether thou ask for their forgiveness or not their sin is unforgivable if thou ask seventy times for their forgiveness allah will not forgive them because they have rejected allah and his messenger and allah guideth not those who are perversely rebellious.
those who were left behind in the tabuk expedition rejoiced in their inaction behind the back of the messenger of allah they hated to strive and fight with their goods and their persons in the cause of allah they said go not forth in the heat. say the fire of hell is fiercer in heat. if only they could understand
let them laugh a little much will they weep a recompense for the evil that they do.
if then allah bring thee back to any of them and they ask thy permission to come out with thee say never shall ye come out with me nor fight an enemy with me for ye preferred to sit inactive on the first occasion then sit ye now with those who lag behind.
nor do thou ever pray for any of them that dies nor stand at his grave for they rejected allah and his messenger and died in a state of perverse rebellion.
nor let their wealth nor their following in sons dazzle thee allahxbs plan is to punish them with these things in this world and that their souls may perish in their very denial of allah.
when a sura comes down enjoining them to believe in allah and to strive and fight along with his messenger those with wealth and influence among them ask thee for exemption and say leave us behind we would be with those who sit at home.
they prefer to be with the women who remain behind at home their hearts are sealed and so they understand not.
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive and fight with their wealth and their persons for them are all good things and it is they who will prosper.
allah hath prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow to dwell therein that is the supreme felicity.
and there were among the desert arabs also men who made excuses and came to claim exemption and those who were false to allah and his messenger merely sat inactive. soon will a grievous penalty seize the unbelievers among them.
there is no blame on those who are infirm or ill or who find no resources to spend on the cause if they are sincere in duty to allah and his messenger no ground of complaint can there be against such as do right and allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
nor is there blame on those who came to thee to be provided with mounts and when thou saidst i can find no mounts for you they turned back their eyes streaming with tears of grief that they had no resources wherewith to provide the expenses.
the ground of complaint is against such as claim exemption while they are rich. they prefer to stay with the women who remain behind allah hath sealed their hearts so they know not what they miss.
they will present their excuses to you when ye return to them. say thou present no excuses we shall not believe you allah hath already informed us of the true state of matters concerning you it is your actions that allah and his messenger will observe in the end will ye be brought back to him who knoweth what is hidden and what is open then will he show you the truth of all that ye did.
they will swear to you by allah when ye return to them that ye may leave them alone. so leave them alone for they are an abomination and hell is their dwellingplacename
they will swear unto you that ye may be pleased with them but if ye are pleased with them allah is not pleased with those who disobey.
the arabs of the desert are the worst in unbelief and hypocrisy and most fitted to be in ignorance of the command which allah hath sent down to his messenger but allah is allknowing allwise.
some of the desert arabs look upon their payments as a fine and watch for disasters for you on them be the disaster of evil for allah is he that heareth and knoweth all things.
but some of the desert arabs believe in allah and the last day and look on their payments as pious gifts bringing them nearer to allah and obtaining the prayers of the messenger. aye indeed they bring them nearer to him soon will allah admit them to his mercy for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
the vanguard of islam the first of those who forsook their homes and of those who gave them aid and also those who follow them in all good deedsname as are they with him for them hath he prepared gardens under which rivers flow to dwell therein for ever that is the supreme felicity.
certain of the desert arabs round about you are hypocrites as well as desert arabs among the medina folk they are obstinate in hypocrisy thou knowest them not we know them twice shall we punish them and in addition shall they be sent to a grievous penalty.
others there are who have acknowledged their wrongdoings they have mixed an act that was good with another that was evil. perhaps allah will turn unto them in mercy for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
of their goods take alms that so thou mightest purify and sanctify them and pray on their behalf. verily thy prayers are a source of security for them and allah is one who heareth and knoweth.
know they not that allah doth accept repentance from his votaries and receives their gifts of charity and that allah is verily he the oftreturning most merciful
and say work righteousness soon will allah observe your work and his messenger and the believers soon will ye be brought back to the knower of what is hidden and what is open then will he show you the truth of all that ye did.
there are yet others held in suspense for the command of allah whether he will punish them or turn in mercy to them and allah is allknowing wise.
and there are those who put up a mosque by way of mischief and infidelity  to disunite the believers  and in preparation for one who warred against allah and his messenger aforetime. they will indeed swear that their intention is nothing but good but allah doth declare that they are certainly liars.
never stand thou forth therein. there is a mosque whose foundation was laid from the first day on piety it is more worthy of the standing forth for prayer therein. in it are men who love to be purified and allah loveth those who make themselves pure.
which then is best  he that layeth his foundation on piety to allah and his good pleasure  or he that layeth his foundation on an undermined sandcliff ready to crumble to pieces and it doth crumble to pieces with him into the fire of hell. and allah guideth not people that do wrong.
the foundation of those who so build is never free from suspicion and shakiness in their hearts until their hearts are cut to pieces. and allah is allknowing wise.
allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods for theirs in return is the garden of paradise they fight in his cause and slay and are slain a promise binding on him in truth through the law the gospel and the qurxban and who is more faithful to his covenant than allah then rejoice in the bargain which ye have concluded that is the achievement supreme.
those that turn to allah in repentance that serve him and praise him that wander in devotion to the cause of allah that bow down and prostrate themselves in prayer that enjoin good and forbid evil and observe the limit set by allah these do rejoice. so proclaim the glad tidings to the believers.
it is not fitting for the prophet and those who believe that they should pray for forgiveness for pagans even though they be of kin after it is clear to them that they are companions of the fire.
and abraham prayed for his fatherxbs forgiveness only because of a promise he had made to him. but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to allah he dissociated himself from him for abraham was most tenderhearted forbearing.
and allah will not mislead a people after he hath guided them in order that he may make clear to them what to fear and avoid for allah hath knowledge of all things.
unto allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth. he giveth life and he taketh it. except for him ye have no protector nor helper.
allah turned with favour to the prophet the muhajirs and the ansarname after that the hearts of a part of them had nearly swerved from duty but he turned to them also for he is unto them most kind most merciful.
he turned in mercy also to the three who were left behind they felt guilty to such a degree that the earth seemed constrained to them for all its spaciousness and their very souls seemed straitened to themname that they might repent for allah is oftreturning most merciful.
o ye who believe fear allah and be with those who are true in word and deed.
it was not fitting for the people of medina and the bedouin arabs of the neighbourhood to refuse to follow allahxbs messenger nor to prefer their own lives to his because nothing could they suffer or do but was reckoned to their credit as a deed of righteousnessname or fatigue or hunger in the cause of allah or trod paths to raise the ire of the unbelievers or received any injury whatever from an enemy for allah suffereth not the reward to be lost of those who do good
nor could they spend anything for the cause  small or great nor cut across a valley but the deed is inscribed to their credit that allah may requite their deed with the best possible reward.
nor should the believers all go forth together if a contingent from every expedition remained behind they could devote themselves to studies in religion and admonish the people when they return to them that thus they may learn to guard themselves against evil.
o ye who believe fight the unbelievers who gird you about and let them find firmness in you and know that allah is with those who fear him.
whenever there cometh down a sura some of them say which of you has had his faith increased by it yea those who believename
but those in whose hearts is a diseasename and they will die in a state of unbelief.
see they not that they are tried every year once or twice yet they turn not in repentance and they take no heed.
whenever there cometh down a sura they look at each other saying doth anyone see you then they turn aside allah hath turned their hearts from the light for they are a people that understand not.
now hath come unto you a messenger from amongst yourselves it grieves him that ye should perish ardently anxious is he over you to the believers is he most kind and merciful.
but if they turn away say allah sufficeth me there is no god but he on him is my trust he the lord of the throne of glory supreme
a.l.r. these are the ayats of the book of wisdom.
is it a matter of wonderment to men that we have sent our inspiration to a man from among themselves that he should warn mankind of their danger and give the good news to the believers that they have before their lord the lofty rank of truth. but say the unbelievers this is indeed an evident sorcerer
verily your lord is allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days and is firmly established on the throne of authority regulating and governing all things. no intercessor can plead with him except after his leave hath been obtained. this is allah your lord him therefore serve ye will ye not receive admonition
to him will be your return of all of you. the promise of allah is true and sure. it is he who beginneth the process of creation and repeateth it that he may reward with justice those who believe and work righteousness but those who reject him will have draughts of boiling fluids and a penalty grievous because they did reject him.
it is he who made the sun to be a shining glory and the moon to be a light of beauty and measured out stages for her that ye might know the number of years and the count of time. nowise did allah create this but in truth and righteousness. thus doth he explain his signs in detail for those who understand.
verily in the alternation of the night and the day and in all that allah hath created in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who fear him.
those who rest not their hope on their meeting with us but are pleased and satisfied with the life of the present and those who heed not our signs
their abode is the fire because of the evil they earned.
those who believe and work righteousnessname
this will be their cry therein glory to thee o allah and peace will be their greeting therein and the close of their cry will be praise be to allah the cherisher and sustainer of the worlds
if allah were to hasten for men the ill they have earned as they would fain hasten on the goodname in their trespasses wandering in distraction to and fro.
when trouble toucheth a man he crieth unto us in all postures lying down on his side or sitting or standing. but when we have solved his trouble he passeth on his way as if he had never cried to us for a trouble that touched him thus do the deeds of transgressors seem fair in their eyes
generations before you we destroyed when they did wrong their messengers came to them with clearsigns but they would not believe thus do we requite those who sin
then we made you heirs in the land after them to see how ye would behave
but when our clear signs are rehearsed unto them those who rest not their hope on their meeting with us say bring us a reading other than this or change this say it is not for me of my own accord to change it i follow naught but what is revealed unto me if i were to disobey my lord i should myself fear the penalty of a great day to come.
say if allah had so willed i should not have rehearsed it to you nor would he have made it known to you. a whole lifetime before this have i tarried amongst you will ye not then understand
who doth more wrong than such as forge a lie against allah or deny his signs but never will prosper those who sin.
they serve besides allah things that hurt them not nor profit them and they say these are our intercessors with allah. say do ye indeed inform allah of something he knows not in the heavens or on earth glory to him and far is he above the partners they ascribe to him
mankind was but one nation but differed later. had it not been for a word that went forth before from thy lord their differences would have been settled between them.
they say why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord say the unseen is only for allah to know then wait ye i too will wait with you.
when we make mankind taste of some mercy after adversity hath touched them behold they take to plotting against our signs say swifter to plan is allah verily our messengers record all the plots that ye make
he it is who enableth you to traverse through land and sea so that ye even board ships they sail with them with a favourable wind and they rejoice thereat then comes a stormy wind and the waves come to them from all sides and they think they are being overwhelmed they cry unto allah sincerely offering their duty unto him saying if thou dost deliver us from this we shall truly show our gratitude
but when he delivereth them behold they transgress insolently through the earth in defiance of right o mankind your insolence is against your own soulsname to us is your return and we shall show you the truth of all that ye did.
the likeness of the life of the present is as the rain which we send down from the skies by its mingling arises the produce of the earth which provides food for men and animals it grows till the earth is clad with its golden ornaments and is decked out in beauty the people to whom it belongs think they have all powers of disposal over it there reaches it our command by night or by day and we make it like a harvest cleanmown as if it had not flourished only the day before thus do we explain the signs in detail for those who reflect.
but allah doth call to the home of peace he doth guide whom he pleaseth to a way that is straight.
to those who do right is a goodly reward yea more than in measure no darkness nor shame shall cover their faces they are companions of the garden they will abide therein for aye
but those who have earned evil will have a reward of like evil ignominy will cover their faces no defender will they have from the wrath of allah their faces will be covered as it were with pieces from the depth of the darkness of night they are companions of the fire they will abide therein for aye
one day shall we gather them all together. then shall we say to those who joined gods with us to your place ye and those ye joined as xbpartnersxb we shall separate them and their partners shall say it was not us that ye worshipped
enough is allah for a witness between us and you we certainly knew nothing of your worship of us
there will every soul prove the fruits of the deeds it sent before they will be brought back to allah their rightful lord and their invented falsehoods will leave them in the lurch.
say who is it that sustains you in life from the sky and from the earth or who is it that has power over hearing and sight and who is it that brings out the living from the dead and the dead from the living and who is it that rules and regulates all affairs they will soon say allah. say will ye not then show piety to him
such is allah your real cherisher and sustainer apart from truth what remains but error how then are ye turned away
thus is the word of thy lord proved true against those who rebel verily they will not believe.
say of your xbpartnersxb can any originate creation and repeat it say it is allah who originates creation and repeats it then how are ye deluded away from the truth
say of your xbpartnersxb is there any that can give any guidance towards truth say it is allah who gives guidance towards truth is then he who gives guidance to truth more worthy to be followed or he who finds not guidance himself unless he is guided what then is the matter with you how judge ye
but most of them follow nothing but fancy truly fancy can be of no avail against truth. verily allah is well aware of all that they do.
this qurxban is not such as can be produced by other than allah on the contrary it is a confirmation of revelations that went before it and a fuller explanation of the book  wherein there is no doubt  from the lord of the worlds.
or do they say he forged it say bring then a sura like unto it and call to your aid anyone you can besides allah if it be ye speak the truth
nay they charge with falsehood that whose knowledge they cannot compass even before the elucidation thereof hath reached them thus did those before them make charges of falsehood but see what was the end of those who did wrong
of them there are some who believe therein and some who do not and thy lord knoweth best those who are out for mischief.
if they charge thee with falsehood say my work to me and yours to you ye are free from responsibility for what i do and i for what ye do
among them are some who pretend to listen to thee but canst thou make the deaf to hearname
and among them are some who look at thee but canst thou guide the blindname
verily allah will not deal unjustly with man in aught it is man that wrongs his own soul.
one day he will gather them together it will be as if they had tarried but an hour of a day they will recognise each other assuredly those will be lost who denied the meeting with allah and refused to receive true guidance.
whether we show thee realised in thy lifetime some part of what we promise themnamename to us is their return ultimately allah is witness to all that they do.
to every people was sent a messenger when their messenger comes before them the matter will be judged between them with justice and they will not be wronged.
they say when will this promise come to pass if ye speak the truth
say i have no power over any harm or profit to myself except as allah willeth. to every people is a term appointed when their term is reached not an hour can they cause delay nor an hour can they advance it in anticipation.
say do ye seenamename
would ye then believe in it at last when it actually cometh to pass it will then be said xbah now and ye wanted aforetime to hasten it onxb
at length will be said to the wrongdoers xbtaste ye the enduring punishment ye get but the recompense of what ye earnedxb
they seek to be informed by thee is that true say aye by my lord it is the very truth and ye cannot frustrate it
every soul that hath sinned if it possessed all that is on earth would fain give it in ransom they would declare their repentance when they see the penalty but the judgment between them will be with justice and no wrong will be done unto them.
is it not the case that to allah belongeth whatever is in the heavens and on earth is it not the case that allahxbs promise is assuredly true yet most of them understand not.
it is he who giveth life and who taketh it and to him shall ye all be brought back.
o mankind there hath come to you a direction from your lord and a healing for the diseases in your heartsname a guidance and a mercy.
say in the bounty of allah. and in his mercy in that let them rejoice that is better than the wealth they hoard.
say see ye what things allah hath sent down to you for sustenance yet ye hold forbidden some things thereof and some things lawful. say hath allah indeed permitted you or do ye invent things to attribute to allah
and what think those who invent lies against allah of the day of judgment verily allah is full of bounty to mankind but most of them are ungrateful.
in whatever business thou mayest be and whatever portion thou mayest be reciting from the qurxbannamename
behold verily on the friends of allah there is no fear nor shall they grieve
those who believe and constantly guard against evil
for them are glad tidings in the life of the present and in the hereafter no change can there be in the words of allah. this is indeed the supreme felicity.
let not their speech grieve thee for all power and honour belong to allah it is he who heareth and knoweth all things.
behold verily to allah belong all creatures in the heavens and on earth. what do they follow who worship as his partners other than allah they follow nothing but fancy and they do nothing but lie.
he it is that hath made you the night that ye may rest therein and the day to make things visible to you. verily in this are signs for those who listen to his message.
they say allah hath begotten a son  glory be to him he is selfsufficient his are all things in the heavens and on earth no warrant have ye for this say ye about allah what ye know not
say those who invent a lie against allah will never prosper.
a little enjoyment in this world and then to us will be their return then shall we make them taste the severest penalty for their blasphemies.
relate to them the story of noah. behold he said to his people o my people if it be hard on your mind that i should stay with you and commemorate the signs of allahname so your plan be on to you dark and dubious. then pass your sentence on me and give me no respite.
but if ye turn back consider no reward have i asked of you my reward is only due from allah and i have been commanded to be of those who submit to allahxbs will in islam.
they rejected him but we delivered him and those with him in the ark and we made them inherit the earth while we overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected our signs. then see what was the end of those who were warned but heeded not
then after him we sent many messengers to their peoples they brought them clear signs but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand. thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors.
then after them sent we moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs. but they were arrogant they were a people in sin.
when the truth did come to them from us they said this is indeed evident sorcery
said moses say ye this about the truth when it hath actually reached you is sorcery like this but sorcerers will not prosper.
they said hast thou come to us to turn us away from the ways we found our fathers following in order that thou and thy brother may have greatness in the land but not we shall believe in you
said pharaoh bring me every sorcerer well versed.
when the sorcerers came moses said to them throw ye what ye wish to throw
when they had had their throw moses said what ye have brought is sorcery allah will surely make it of no effect for allah prospereth not the work of those who make mischief.
and allah by his words doth prove and establish his truth however much the sinners may hate it
but none believed in moses except some children of his people because of the fear of pharaoh and his chiefs lest they should persecute them and certainly pharaoh was mighty on the earth and one who transgressed all bounds.
moses said o my people if ye do really believe in allah then in him put your trust if ye submit your will to his.
they said in allah do we put out trust. our lord make us not a trial for those who practise oppression
and deliver us by thy mercy from those who reject thee.
we inspired moses and his brother with this message provide dwellings for your people in egypt make your dwellings into places of worship and establish regular prayers and give glad tidings to those who believe
moses prayed our lord thou hast indeed bestowed on pharaoh and his chiefs splendour and wealth in the life of the present and so our lord they mislead men from thy path. deface our lord the features of their wealth and send hardness to their hearts so they will not believe until they see the grievous penalty.
allah said accepted is your prayer o moses and aaron so stand ye straight and follow not the path of those who know not.
we took the children of israel across the sea pharaoh and his hosts followed them in insolence and spite. at length when overwhelmed with the flood he said i believe that there is no god except him whom the children of israel believe in i am of those who submit to allah in islam.
it was said to him ah now but a little while before wast thou in rebellion and thou didst mischief and violence
this day shall we save thee in the body that thou mayest be a sign to those who come after thee but verily many among mankind are heedless of our signs
we settled the children of israel in a beautiful dwellingplace and provided for them sustenance of the best it was after knowledge had been granted to them that they fell into schisms. verily allah will judge between them as to the schisms amongst them on the day of judgment.
if thou wert in doubt as to what we have revealed unto thee then ask those who have been reading the book from before thee the truth hath indeed come to thee from thy lord so be in no wise of those in doubt.
nor be of those who reject the signs of allah or thou shalt be of those who perish.
those against whom the word of thy lord hath been verified would not believe
even if every sign was brought unto themname
why was there not a single township among those we warned which believednamename we removed from them the penalty of ignominy in the life of the present and permitted them to enjoy their life for a while.
if it had been thy lordxbs will they would all have believedname against their will to believe
no soul can believe except by the will of allah and he will place doubt or obscurity on those who will not understand.
say behold all that is in the heavens and on earth but neither signs nor warners profit those who believe not.
do they then expect any thing but what happened in the days of the men who passed away before them say wait ye then for i too will wait with you.
in the end we deliver our messengers and those who believe thus is it fitting on our part that we should deliver those who believe
say o ye men if ye are in doubt as to my religion behold i worship not what ye worship other than allah but i worship allah  who will take your souls at death i am commanded to be in the ranks of the believers
and further thus xbset thy face towards religion with true piety and never in any wise be of the unbelievers
xbnor call on any other than allah such will neither profit thee nor hurt thee if thou dost behold thou shalt certainly be of those who do wrong.xb
if allah do touch thee with hurt there is none can remove it but he if he do design some benefit for thee there is none can keep back his favour he causeth it to reach whomsoever of his servants he pleaseth. and he is the oftforgiving most merciful.
say o ye men now truth hath reached you from your lord those who receive guidance do so for the good of their own souls those who stray do so to their own loss and i am not set over you to arrange your affairs.
follow thou the inspiration sent unto thee and be patient and constant till allah do decide for he is the best to decide.
a. l. r. this is a book with verses basic or fundamental of established meaning further explained in detail from one who is wise and wellacquainted with all things
it teacheth that ye should worship none but allah. say verily i am sent unto you from him to warn and to bring glad tidings
and to preach thus xbseek ye the forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance that he may grant you enjoyment good and true for a term appointed and bestow his abounding grace on all who abound in merit but if ye turn away then i fear for you the penalty of a great day
xbto allah is your return and he hath power over all things.xb
behold they fold up their hearts that they may lie hid from him ah even when they cover themselves with their garments he knoweth what they conceal and what they reveal for he knoweth well the inmost secrets of the hearts.
there is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on allah he knoweth the time and place of its definite abode and its temporary deposit all is in a clear record.
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days  and his throne was over the waters  that he might try you which of you is best in conduct. but if thou wert to say to them ye shall indeed be raised up after death the unbelievers would be sure to say this is nothing but obvious sorcery
if we delay the penalty for them for a definite term they are sure to say what keeps it back ah on the day it actually reaches them nothing will turn it away from them and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at
if we give man a taste of mercy from ourselves and then withdraw it from him behold he is in despair and falls into blasphemy.
but if we give him a taste of our favours after adversity hath touched him he is sure to say all evil has departed from me behold he falls into exultation and pride.
not so do those who show patience and constancy and work righteousness for them is forgiveness of sins and a great reward.
perchance thou mayest feel the inclination to give up a part of what is revealed unto thee and thy heart feeleth straitened lest they say why is not a treasure sent down unto him or why does not an angel come down with him but thou art there only to warn it is allah that arrangeth all affairs
or they may say he forged it say bring ye then ten suras forged like unto it and call to your aid whomsoever ye can other than allah if ye speak the truth
if then they your false gods answer not your call know ye that this revelation is sent down replete with the knowledge of allah and that there is no god but he will ye even then submit to islam
those who desire the life of the present and its glitternamename
they are those for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire vain are the designs they frame therein and of no effect and the deeds that they do
can they be like those who accept a clear sign from their lord and whom a witness from himself doth teach as did the book of moses before it a guide and a mercy they believe therein but those of the sects that reject it the fire will be their promised meetingplace. be not then in doubt thereon for it is the truth from thy lord yet many among men do not believe
who doth more wrong than those who invent a life against allah they will be turned back to the presence of their lord and the witnesses will say these are the ones who lied against their lord behold the curse of allah is on those who do wrong
those who would hinder men from the path of allah and would seek in it something crooked these were they who denied the hereafter
they will in no wise frustrate his design on earth nor have they protectors besides allah their penalty will be doubled they lost the power to hear and they did not see
they are the ones who have lost their own souls and the fancies they invented have left them in the lurch
without a doubt these are the very ones who will lose most in the hereafter
but those who believe and work righteousness and humble themselves before their lordname to dwell therein for aye
these two kinds of men may be compared to the blind and deaf and those who can see and hear well. are they equal when compared will ye not then take heed
we sent noah to his people with a mission i have come to you with a clear warning
that ye serve none but allah verily i do fear for you the penalty of a grievous day.
but the chiefs of the unbelievers among his people said we see in thee nothing but a man like ourselves nor do we see that any follow thee but the meanest among us in judgment immature nor do we see in you all any merit above us in fact we thing ye are liars
he said o my people see ye if it be that i have a clear sign from my lord and that he hath sent mercy unto me from his own presence but that the mercy hath been obscured from your sight shall we compel you to accept it when ye are averse to it
and o my people i ask you for no wealth in return my reward is from none but allah but i will not drive away in contempt those who believe for verily they are to meet their lord and ye i see are the ignorant ones
and o my people who would help me against allah if i drove them away will ye not then take heed
i tell you not that with me are the treasures of allah nor do i know what is hidden nor claim i to be an angel. nor yet do i say of those whom your eyes do despise that allah will not grant them all that is good allah knoweth best what is in their souls i should if i did indeed be a wrongdoer.
they said o noah thou hast disputed with us and much hast thou prolonged the dispute with us now bring upon us what thou threatenest us with if thou speakest the truth
he said truly allah will bring it on you if he willsname ye will not be able to frustrate it
of no profit will be my counsel to you much as i desire to give you good counsel if it be that allah willeth to leave you astray he is your lord and to him will ye return
or do they say he has forged it say if i had forged it on me were my sin and i am free of the sins of which ye are guilty
it was revealed to noah none of thy people will believe except those who have believed already so grieve no longer over their evil deeds.
but construct an ark under our eyes and our inspiration and address me no further on behalf of those who are in sin for they are about to be overwhelmed in the flood.
forthwith he starts constructing the ark every time that the chiefs of his people passed by him they threw ridicule on him. he said if ye ridicule us now we in our turn can look down on you with ridicule likewise
but soon will ye know who it is on whom will descend a penalty that will cover them with shame on whom will be unloosed a penalty lasting
at length behold there came our command and the fountains of the earth gushed forth we said embark therein of each kind two male and female and your family  except those against whom the word has already gone forth and the believers. but only a few believed with him.
so he said embark ye on the ark in the name of allah whether it move or be at rest for my lord is be sure oftforgiving most merciful
so the ark floated with them on the waves towering like mountains and noah called out to his son who had separated himself from the rest o my son embark with us and be not with the unbelievers
the son replied i will betake myself to some mountain it will save me from the water. noah said this day nothing can save from the command of allah any but those on whom he hath mercy and the waves came between them and the son was among those overwhelmed in the flood.
then the word went forth o earth swallow up thy water and o sky withhold thy rain and the water abated and the matter was ended. the ark rested on mount judi and the word went forth away with those who do wrong
and noah called upon his lord and said o my lord surely my son is of my family and thy promise is true and thou art the justest of judges
he said o noah he is not of thy family for his conduct is unrighteous. so ask not of me that of which thou hast no knowledge i give thee counsel lest thou act like the ignorant
noah said o my lord i do seek refuge with thee lest i ask thee for that of which i have no knowledge. and unless thou forgive me and have mercy on me i should indeed be lost
the word came o noah come down from the ark with peace from us and blessing on thee and on some of the peoples who will spring from those with thee but there will be other peoples to whom we shall grant their pleasures for a time but in the end will a grievous penalty reach them from us.
such are some of the stories of the unseen which we have revealed unto thee before this neither thou nor thy people knew them. so persevere patiently for the end is for those who are righteous.
to the xbad people we sent hud one of their own brethren. he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him. your other gods ye do nothing but invent
o my people i ask of you no reward for this message. my reward is from none but him who created me will ye not then understand
and o my people ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance he will send you the skies pouring abundant rain and add strength to your strength so turn ye not back in sin
they said o hud no clear sign that hast thou brought us and we are not the ones to desert our gods on thy word nor shall we believe in thee
we say nothing but that perhaps some of our gods may have seized thee with imbecility. he said i call allah to witness and do ye bear witness that i am free from the sin of ascribing to him
other gods as partners so scheme your worst against me all of you and give me no respite.
i put my trust in allah my lord and your lord there is not a moving creature but he hath grasp of its forelock. verily it is my lord that is on a straight path.
if ye turn awayname and you will not harm him in the least. for my lord hath care and watch over all things.
so when our decree issued we saved hud and those who believed with him by special grace from ourselves we saved them from a severe penalty.
such were the xbad people they rejected the signs of their lord and cherisher disobeyed his messengers and followed the command of every powerful obstinate transgressor.
and they were pursued by a curse in this life and on the day of judgment. ah behold for the xbad rejected their lord and cherisher ah behold removed from sight were xbad the people of hud
to the thamud people we sent salih one of their own brethren. he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him. it is he who hath produced you from the earth and settled you therein then ask forgiveness of him and turn to him in repentance for my lord is always near ready to answer.
they said o salih thou hast been of us a centre of our hopes hitherto dost thou now forbid us the worship of what our fathers worshipped but we are really in suspicious disquieting doubt as to that to which thou invitest us.
he said o my people do ye see if i have a clear sign from my lord and he hath sent mercy unto me from himselfname
and o my people this shecamel of allah is a symbol to you leave her to feed on allahxbs free earth and inflict no harm on her or a swift penalty will seize you
but they did hamstring her. so he said enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days then will be your ruin behold there a promise not to be belied
when our decree issued we saved salih and those who believed with him by special grace from ourselves  and from the ignominy of that day. for thy lord  he is the strong one and able to enforce his will.
the mighty blast overtook the wrongdoers and they lay prostrate in their homes before the morning
as if they had never dwelt and flourished there. ah behold for the thamud rejected their lord and cherisher ah behold removed from sight were the thamud
there came our messengers to abraham with glad tidings. they said peace he answered peace and hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf.
but when he saw their hands went not towards the meal he felt some mistrust of them and conceived a fear of them. they said fear not we have been sent against the people of lut.
and his wife was standing there and she laughed but we gave her glad tidings of isaac and after him of jacob.
she said alas for me shall i bear a child seeing i am an old woman and my husband here is an old man that would indeed be a wonderful thing
they said dost thou wonder at allahxbs decree the grace of allah and his blessings on you o ye people of the house for he is indeed worthy of all praise full of all glory
when fear had passed from the mind of abraham and the glad tidings had reached him he began to plead with us for lutxbs people.
for abraham was without doubt forbearing of faults compassionate and given to look to allah.
o abraham seek not this. the decree of thy lord hath gone forth for them there cometh a penalty that cannot be turned back
when our messengers came to lut he was grieved on their account and felt himself powerless to protect them. he said this is a distressful day.
and his people came rushing towards him and they had been long in the habit of practising abominations. he said o my people here are my daughters they are purer for you if ye marry now fear allah and cover me not with shame about my guests is there not among you a single rightminded man
they said well dost thou know we have no need of thy daughters indeed thou knowest quite well what we want
he said would that i had power to suppress you or that i could betake myself to some powerful support.
the messengers said o lut we are messengers from thy lord by no means shall they reach thee now travel with thy family while yet a part of the night remains and let not any of you look back but thy wife will remain behind to her will happen what happens to the people. morning is their time appointed is not the morning nigh
when our decree issued we turned the cities upside down and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay spread layer on layer
marked as from thy lord nor are they ever far from those who do wrong
to the madyan people we sent shuxbaib one of their own brethren he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him. and give not short measure or weight i see you in prosperity but i fear for you the penalty of a day that will compass you all round.
and o my people give just measure and weight nor withhold from the people the things that are their due commit not evil in the land with intent to do mischief.
that which is left you by allah is best for you if ye but believed but i am not set over you to keep watch
they said o shuxbaib does thy religion of prayer command thee that we leave off the worship which our fathers practised or that we leave off doing what we like with our property truly thou art the one that forbeareth with faults and is rightminded
he said o my people see ye whether i have a clear sign from my lord and he hath given me sustenance pure and good as from himself i wish not in opposition to you to do that which i forbid you to do. i only desire your betterment to the best of my power and my success in my task can only come from allah. in him i trust and unto him i look.
and o my people let not my dissent from you cause you to sin lest ye suffer a fate similar to that of the people of noah or of hud or of salih nor are the people of lut far off from you
but ask forgiveness of your lord and turn unto him in repentance for my lord is indeed full of mercy and lovingkindness.
they said o shuxbaib much of what thou sayest we do not understand in fact among us we see that thou hast no strength were it not for thy family we should certainly have stoned thee for thou hast among us no great position
he said o my people is then my family of more consideration with you than allah for ye cast him away behind your backs with contempt. but verily my lord encompasseth on all sides all that ye do
and o my people do whatever ye can i will do my part soon will ye know who it is on whom descends the penalty of ignominy and who is a liar and watch ye for i too am watching with you
when our decree issued we saved shuxbaib and those who believed with him by special mercy from ourselves but the mighty blast did seize the wrongdoers and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning
as if they had never dwelt and flourished there ah behold how the madyan were removed from sight as were removed the thamud
and we sent moses with our clear signs and an authority manifest
unto pharaoh and his chiefs but they followed the command of pharaoh and the command of pharaoh was no right guide.
he will go before his people on the day of judgment and lead them into the fire as cattle are led to water but woeful indeed will be the place to which they are led
and they are followed by a curse in this life and on the day of judgment and woeful is the gift which shall be given unto them
these are some of the stories of communities which we relate unto thee of them some are standing and some have been mown down by the sickle of time.
it was not we that wronged them they wronged their own souls the deities other than allah whom they invoked profited them no whit when there issued the decree of thy lord nor did they add aught to their lot but perdition
such is the chastisement of thy lord when he chastises communities in the midst of their wrong grievous indeed and severe is his chastisement.
in that is a sign for those who fear the penalty of the hereafter that is a day for which mankind will be gathered together that will be a day of testimony.
nor shall we delay it but for a term appointed.
the day it arrives no soul shall speak except by his leave of those gathered some will be wretched and some will be blessed.
those who are wretched shall be in the fire there will be for them therein nothing but the heaving of sighs and sobs
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure except as thy lord willeth for thy lord is the sure accomplisher of what he planneth.
and those who are blessed shall be in the garden they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure except as thy lord willeth a gift without break.
be not then in doubt as to what these men worship. they worship nothing but what their fathers worshipped before them but verily we shall pay them back in full their portion without the least abatement.
we certainly gave the book to moses but differences arose therein had it not been that a word had gone forth before from thy lord the matter would have been decided between them but they are in suspicious doubt concerning it.
and of a surety to all will your lord pay back in full the recompense of their deeds for he knoweth well all that they do.
therefore stand firm in the straight path as thou art commanded thou and those who with thee turn unto allah and transgress not from the path for he seeth well all that ye do.
and incline not to those who do wrong or the fire will seize you and ye have no protectors other than allah nor shall ye be helped.
and establish regular prayers at the two ends of the day and at the approaches of the night for those things that are good remove those that are evil be that the word of remembrance to those who remember their lord
and be steadfast in patience for verily allah will not suffer the reward of the righteous to perish.
why were there not among the generations before you persons possessed of balanced good sense prohibiting men from mischief in the earth  except a few among them whom we saved from harm but the wrongdoers pursued the enjoyment of the good things of life which were given them and persisted in sin.
nor would thy lord be the one to destroy communities for a single wrongdoing if its members were likely to mend.
if thy lord had so willed he could have made mankind one people but they will not cease to dispute.
except those on whom thy lord hath bestowed his mercy and for this did he create them and the word of thy lord shall be fulfilled i will fill hell with jinns and men all together.
all that we relate to thee of the stories of the messengersname as well as an exhortation and a message of remembrance to those who believe.
say to those who do not believe do what ever ye can we shall do our part
and wait ye we too shall wait.
to allah do belong the unseen secrets of the heavens and the earth and to him goeth back every affair for decision then worship him and put thy trust in him and thy lord is not unmindful of aught that ye do.
a.l.r. these are the symbols or verses of the perspicuous book.
we have sent it down as an arabic qurxban in order that ye may learn wisdom.
we do relate unto thee the most beautiful of stories in that we reveal to thee this portion of the qurxban before this thou too was among those who knew it not.
behold joseph said to his father o my father i did see eleven stars and the sun and the moon i saw them prostrate themselves to me
said the father my dear little son relate not thy vision to thy brothers lest they concoct a plot against thee for satan is to man an avowed enemy
thus will thy lord choose thee and teach thee the interpretation of stories and events and perfect his favour to thee and to the posterity of jacob  even as he perfected it to thy fathers abraham and isaac aforetime for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
verily in joseph and his brethren are signs or symbols for seekers after truth.
they said truly joseph and his brother are loved more by our father than we but we are a goodly body really our father is obviously wandering in his mind
slay ye joseph or cast him out to some unknown land that so the favour of your father may be given to you alone there will be time enough for you to be righteous after that
said one of them slay not joseph but if ye must do something throw him down to the bottom of the well he will be picked up by some caravan of travellers.
they said o our father why dost thou not trust us with josephname
send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play and we shall take every care of him.
jacob said really it saddens me that ye should take him away i fear lest the wolf should devour him while ye attend not to him.
they said if the wolf were to devour him while we are so large a party then should we indeed first have perished ourselves
so they did take him away and they all agreed to throw him down to the bottom of the well and we put into his heart this message xbof a surety thou shalt one day tell them the truth of this their affair while they know thee notxb
then they came to their father in the early part of the night weeping.
they said o our father we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things and the wolf devoured him.... but thou wilt never believe us even though we tell the truth.
they stained his shirt with false blood. he said nay but your minds have made up a tale that may pass with you for me patience is most fitting against that which ye assert it is allah alone whose help can be sought..
then there came a caravan of travellers they sent their watercarrier for water and he let down his bucket into the well...he said ah there good news here is a fine young man so they concealed him as a treasure but allah knoweth well all that they do
the brethren sold him for a miserable price for a few dirhams counted out in such low estimation did they hold him
the man in egypt who bought him said to his wife make his stay among us honourable may be he will bring us much good or we shall adopt him as a son. thus did we establish joseph in the land that we might teach him the interpretation of stories and events. and allah hath full power and control over his affairs but most among mankind know it not.
when joseph attained his full manhood we gave him power and knowledge thus do we reward those who do right.
but she in whose house he was sought to seduce him from his true self she fastened the doors and said now come thou dear one he said allah forbid truly thy husband is my lord he made my sojourn agreeable truly to no good come those who do wrong
and with passion did she desire him and he would have desired her but that he saw the evidence of his lord thus did we order that we might turn away from him all evil and shameful deeds for he was one of our servants sincere and purified.
so they both raced each other to the door and she tore his shirt from the back they both found her lord near the door. she said what is the fitting punishment for one who formed an evil design against thy wife but prison or a grievous chastisement
he said it was she that sought to seduce me  from my true self. and one of her household saw this and bore witness thus if it be that his shirt is rent from the front then is her tale true and he is a liar
but if it be that his shirt is torn from the back then is she the liar and he is telling the truth
so when he saw his shirtname her husband said behold it is a snare of you women truly mighty is your snare
o joseph pass this over o wife ask forgiveness for thy sin for truly thou hast been at fault
ladies said in the city the wife of the great xbaziz is seeking to seduce her slave from his true self truly hath he inspired her with violent love we see she is evidently going astray.
when she heard of their malicious talk she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them she gave each of them a knife and she said to joseph come out before them. when they saw him they did extol him and in their amazement cut their hands they said allah preserve us no mortal is this this is none other than a noble angel
she said there before you is the man about whom ye did blame me i did seek to seduce him from his true self but he did firmly save himself guiltless....and now if he doth not my bidding he shall certainly be cast into prison and what is more be of the company of the vilest
he said o my lord the prison is more to my liking than that to which they invite me unless thou turn away their snare from me i should in my youthful folly feel inclined towards them and join the ranks of the ignorant.
so his lord hearkened to him in his prayer and turned away from him their snare verily he heareth and knoweth all things.
then it occurred to the men after they had seen the signs that it was best to imprison him for a time.
now with him there came into the prison two young men. said one of them i see myself in a dream pressing wine. said the other i see myself in a dream carrying bread on my head and birds are eating thereof. tell us they said the truth and meaning thereof for we see thou art one that doth good to all.
he said before any food comes in due course to feed either of you i will surely reveal to you the truth and meaning of this ere it befall you that is part of the duty which my lord hath taught me. i have i assure you abandoned the ways of a people that believe not in allah and that even deny the hereafter.
and i follow the ways of my fathersname isaac and jacob and never could we attribute any partners whatever to allah that comes of the grace of allah to us and to mankind yet most men are not grateful.
o my two companions of the prison i ask you are many lords differing among themselves better or the one allah supreme and irresistible
if not him ye worship nothing but names which ye have namednamename but most men understand not...
o my two companions of the prison as to one of you he will pour out the wine for his lord to drink as for the other he will hang from the cross and the birds will eat from off his head. so hath been decreed that matter whereof ye twain do enquire...
and of the two to that one whom he consider about to be saved he said mention me to thy lord. but satan made him forget to mention him to his lord and joseph lingered in prison a few more years.
the king of egypt said i do see in a vision seven fat kine whom seven lean ones devour and seven green ears of corn and seven others withered. o ye chiefs expound to me my vision if it be that ye can interpret visions.
they said a confused medley of dreams and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams.
but the man who had been released one of the two who had been in prison and who now bethought him after so long a space of time said i will tell you the truth of its interpretation send ye me therefore.
o joseph he said o man of truth expound to us the dream of seven fat kine whom seven lean ones devour and of seven green ears of corn and seven others withered that i may return to the people and that they may understand.
joseph said for seven years shall ye diligently sow as is your wont and the harvests that ye reap ye shall leave them in the earname of which ye shall eat.
then will come after that period seven dreadful years which will devour what ye shall have laid by in advance for themname
then will come after that period a year in which the people will have abundant water and in which they will press wine and oil.
so the king said bring ye him unto me. but when the messenger came to him joseph said go thou back to thy lord and ask him xbwhat is the state of mind of the ladies who cut their handsxb for my lord is certainly well aware of their snare.
the king said to the ladies what was your affair when ye did seek to seduce joseph from his true self the ladies said allah preserve us no evil know we against him said the xbazizxbs wife now is the truth manifest to all it was i who sought to seduce him from his true self he is indeed of those who are ever true and virtuous.
this say i in order that he may know that i have never been false to him in his absence and that allah will never guide the snare of the false ones.
nor do i absolve my own self of blame the human soul is certainly prone to evil unless my lord do bestow his mercy but surely my lord is oftforgiving most merciful.
so the king said bring him unto me i will take him specially to serve about my own person. therefore when he had spoken to him he said be assured this day thou art before our own presence with rank firmly established and fidelity fully proved
joseph said set me over the storehouses of the land i will indeed guard them as one that knows their importance.
thus did we give established power to joseph in the land to take possession therein as when or where he pleased. we bestow of our mercy on whom we please and we suffer not to be lost the reward of those who do good.
but verily the reward of the hereafter is the best for those who believe and are constant in righteousness.
then came josephxbs brethren they entered his presence and he knew them but they knew him not.
and when he had furnished them forth with provisions suitable for them he said bring unto me a brother ye have of the same father as yourselves but a different mother see ye not that i pay out full measure and that i do provide the best hospitality
now if ye bring him not to me ye shall have no measure of corn from me nor shall ye even come near me.
they said we shall certainly seek to get our wish about him from his father indeed we shall do it.
and joseph told his servants to put their stockintrade with which they had bartered into their saddlebags so they should know it only when they returned to their people in order that they might come back.
now when they returned to their father they said o our father no more measure of grain shall we get unless we take our brother so send our brother with us that we may get our measure and we will indeed take every care of him.
he said shall i trust you with him with any result other than when i trusted you with his brother aforetime but allah is the best to take care of him and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy
then when they opened their baggage they found their stockintrade had been returned to them. they said o our father what more can we desire this our stockintrade has been returned to us so we shall get more food for our family we shall take care of our brother and add at the same time a full camelxbs load of grain to our provisions. this is but a small quantity.
jacob said never will i send him with you until ye swear a solemn oath to me in allahxbs name that ye will be sure to bring him back to me unless ye are yourselves hemmed in and made powerless. and when they had sworn their solemn oath he said over all that we say be allah the witness and guardian
further he said o my sons enter not all by one gate enter ye by different gates. not that i can profit you aught against allah with my advice none can command except allah on him do i put my trust and let all that trust put their trust on him.
and when they entered in the manner their father had enjoined it did not profit them in the least against the plan of allah it was but a necessity of jacobxbs soul which he discharged. for he was by our instruction full of knowledge and experience but most men know not.
now when they came into josephxbs presence he received his full brother to stay with him. he said to him behold i am thy own brother so grieve not at aught of their doings.
at length when he had furnished them forth with provisions suitable for them he put the drinking cup into his brotherxbs saddlebag. then shouted out a crier o ye in the caravan behold ye are thieves without doubt
they said turning towards them what is it that ye miss
they said we miss the great beaker of the king for him who produces it is the reward of a camel load i will be bound by it.
the brothers said by allah well ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land and we are no thieves
the egyptians said what then shall be the penalty of this if ye are proved to have lied
they said the penalty should be that he in whose saddlebag it is found should be held as bondman to atone for the crime. thus it is we punish the wrongdoers
so he began the search with their baggage before he came to the baggage of his brother at length he brought it out of his brotherxbs baggage. thus did we plan for joseph. he could not take his brother by the law of the king except that allah willed it so. we raise to degrees of wisdom whom we please but over all endued with knowledge is one the allknowing.
they said if he steals there was a brother of his who did steal before him. but these things did joseph keep locked in his heart revealing not the secrets to them. he simply said to himself ye are the worse situated and allah knoweth best the truth of what ye assert
they said o exalted one behold he has a father aged and venerable who will grieve for him so take one of us in his place for we see that thou art gracious in doing good.
he said allah forbid that we take other than him with whom we found our property indeed if we did so we should be acting wrongfully.
now when they saw no hope of his yielding they held a conference in private. the leader among them said know ye not that your father did take an oath from you in allahxbs name and how before this ye did fail in your duty with joseph therefore will i not leave this land until my father permits me or allah commands me and he is the best to command.
turn ye back to your father and say xbo our father behold thy son committed theft we bear witness only to what we know and we could not well guard against the unseen
xbask at the town where we have been and the caravan in which we returned and you will find we are indeed telling the truth.xb
jacob said nay but ye have yourselves contrived a story good enough for you. so patience is most fitting for me. maybe allah will bring them back all to me in the end. for he is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom.
and he turned away from them and said how great is my grief for joseph and his eyes became white with sorrow and he fell into silent melancholy.
they said by allah never wilt thou cease to remember joseph until thou reach the last extremity of illness or until thou die
he said i only complain of my distraction and anguish to allah and i know from allah that which ye know not...
o my sons go ye and enquire about joseph and his brother and never give up hope of allahxbs soothing mercy truly no one despairs of allahxbs soothing mercy except those who have no faith.
then when they came back into josephxbs presence they said o exalted one distress has seized us and our family we have now brought but scanty capital so pay us full measure we pray thee and treat it as charity to us for allah doth reward the charitable.
he said know ye how ye dealt with joseph and his brother not knowing what ye were doing
they said art thou indeed joseph he said i am joseph and this is my brother allah has indeed been gracious to us all behold he that is righteous and patientname of those who do right.
they said by allah indeed has allah preferred thee above us and we certainly have been guilty of sin
he said this day let no reproach be cast on you allah will forgive you and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy
go with this my shirt and cast it over the face of my father he will come to see clearly. then come ye here to me together with all your family.
when the caravan left egypt their father said i do indeed scent the presence of joseph nay think me not a dotard.
they said by allah truly thou art in thine old wandering mind.
then when the bearer of the good news came he cast the shirt over his face and he forthwith regained clear sight. he said did i not say to you xbi know from allah that which ye know notxb
they said o our father ask for us forgiveness for our sins for we were truly at fault.
he said soon will i ask my lord for forgiveness for you for he is indeed oftforgiving most merciful.
then when they entered the presence of joseph he provided a home for his parents with himself and said enter ye egypt all in safety if it please allah.
and he raised his parents high on the throne of dignity and they fell down in prostration all before him. he said o my father this is the fulfilment of my vision of old allah hath made it come true he was indeed good to me when he took me out of prison and brought you all here out of the desert even after satan had sown enmity between me and my brothers. verily my lord understandeth best the mysteries of all that he planneth to do for verily he is full of knowledge and wisdom.
o my lord thou hast indeed bestowed on me some power and taught me something of the interpretation of dreams and eventsname and unite me with the righteous.
such is one of the stories of what happened unseen which we reveal by inspiration unto thee nor wast thou present with them then when they concerted their plans together in the process of weaving their plots.
yet no faith will the greater part of mankind have however ardently thou dost desire it.
and no reward dost thou ask of them for this it is no less than a message for all creatures.
and how many signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by yet they turn their faces away from them
and most of them believe not in allah without associating other as partners with him
do they then feel secure from the coming against them of the covering veil of the wrath of allahname
say thou this is my way i do invite unto allahname i and whoever follows me. glory to allah and never will i join gods with allah
nor did we send before thee as messengers any but men whom we did inspirename and see what was the end of those before them but the home of the hereafter is best for those who do right. will ye not then understand
respite will be granted until when the messengers give up hope of their people and come to think that they were treated as liars there reaches them our help and those whom we will are delivered into safety. but never will be warded off our punishment from those who are in sin.
there is in their stories instruction for men endued with understanding. it is not a tale invented but a confirmation of what went before itname and a guide and a mercy to any such as believe.
a.l.m.r. these are the signs or verses of the book that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy lord is the truth but most men believe not.
allah is he who raised the heavens without any pillars that ye can see is firmly established on the throne of authority he has subjected the sun and the moon to his law each one runs its course for a term appointed. he doth regulate all affairs explaining the signs in detail that ye may believe with certainty in the meeting with your lord.
and it is he who spread out the earth and set thereon mountains standing firm and flowing rivers and fruit of every kind he made in pairs two and two he draweth the night as a veil oxber the day. behold verily in these things there are signs for those who consider
and in the earth are tracts diverse though neighbouring and gardens of vines and fields sown with corn and palm trees  growing out of single roots or otherwise watered with the same water yet some of them we make more excellent than others to eat. behold verily in these things there are signs for those who understand
if thou dost marvel at their want of faith strange is their saying when we are actually dust shall we indeed then be in a creation renewed they are those who deny their lord they are those round whose necks will be yokes of servitude they will be companions of the fire to dwell therein for aye
they ask thee to hasten on the evil in preference to the good yet have come to pass before them many exemplary punishments but verily thy lord is full of forgiveness for mankind for their wrongdoing and verily thy lord is also strict in punishment.
and the unbelievers say why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord but thou art truly a warner and to every people a guide.
allah doth know what every female womb doth bear by how much the wombs fall short of their time or number or do exceed. every single thing is before his sight in due proportion.
he knoweth the unseen and that which is open he is the great the most high.
it is the same to him whether any of you conceal his speech or declare it openly whether he lie hid by night or walk forth freely by day.
for each such person there are angels in succession before and behind him they guard him by command of allah. allah does not change a peoplexbs lot unless they change what is in their hearts. but when once allah willeth a peoplexbs punishment there can be no turning it back nor will they find besides him any to protect.
it is he who doth show you the lightning by way both of fear and of hope it is he who doth raise up the clouds heavy with fertilising rain
nay thunder repeateth his praises and so do the angels with awe he flingeth the loudvoiced thunderbolts and therewith he striketh whomsoever he will..yet these are the men who dare to dispute about allah with the strength of his power supreme
for him alone is prayer in truth any others that they call upon besides him hear them no more than if they were to stretch forth their hands for water to reach their mouths but it reaches them not for the prayer of those without faith is nothing but futile wandering in the mind.
whatever beings there are in the heavens and the earth do prostrate themselves to allah acknowledging subjectionname
say who is the lord and sustainer of the heavens and the earth say it is allah. say do ye then take for worship protectors other than him such as have no power either for good or for harm to themselves say are the blind equal with those who see or the depths of darkness equal with light or do they assign to allah partners who have created anything as he has created so that the creation seemed to them similar say allah is the creator of all things he is the one the supreme and irresistible.
he sends down water from the skies and the channels flow each according to its measure but the torrent bears away to foam that mounts up to the surface. even so from that ore which they heat in the fire to make ornaments or utensils therewith there is a scum likewise. thus doth allah by parables show forth truth and vanity. for the scum disappears like forth cast out while that which is for the good of mankind remains on the earth. thus doth allah set forth parables.
for those who respond to their lord are all good things. but those who respond not to himname and as much more in vain would they offer it for ransom. for them will the reckoning be terrible their abode will be hell what a bed of misery
is then one who doth know that that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy lord is the truth like one who is blind it is those who are endued with understanding that receive admonition
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and fail not in their plighted word
those who join together those things which allah hath commanded to be joined hold their lord in awe and fear the terrible reckoning
those who patiently persevere seeking the countenance of their lord establish regular prayers spend out of the gifts we have bestowed for their sustenance secretly and openly and turn off evil with good for such there is the final attainment of the eternal home
gardens of perpetual bliss they shall enter there as well as the righteous among their fathers their spouses and their offspring and angels shall enter unto them from every gate with the salutation
peace unto you for that ye persevered in patience now how excellent is the final home
but those who break the covenant of allah after having plighted their word thereto and cut asunder those things which allah has commanded to be joined and work mischief in the land on them is the curse for them is the terrible home
allah doth enlarge or grant by strict measure the sustenance which he giveth to whomso he pleaseth. the wordly rejoice in the life of this world but the life of this world is but little comfort in the hereafter.
the unbelievers say why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord say truly allah leaveth to stray whom he will but he guideth to himself those who turn to him in penitence
those who believe and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of allah for without doubt in the remembrance of allah do hearts find satisfaction.
for those who believe and work righteousness is every blessedness and a beautiful place of final return.
thus have we sent thee amongst a people before whom long since have other peoples gone and passed away in order that thou mightest rehearse unto them what we send down unto thee by inspiration yet do they reject him the most gracious say he is my lord there is no god but he on him is my trust and to him do i turn
if there were a qurxban with which mountains were moved or the earth were cloven asunder or the dead were made to speak this would be the one but truly the command is with allah in all things do not the believers know that had allah so willed he could have guided all mankind to the right but the unbelieversname or to settle close to their homes until the promise of allah come to pass for verily allah will not fail in his promise.
mocked were many messengers before thee but i granted respite to the unbelievers and finally i punished them then how terrible was my requital
is then he who standeth over every soul and knoweth all that it doth like any others and yet they ascribe partners to allah. say but name them is it that ye will inform him of something he knoweth not on earth or is it just a show of words nay to those who believe not their pretence seems pleasing but they are kept back thereby from the path. and those whom allah leaves to stray no one can guide.
for them is a penalty in the life of this world but harder truly is the penalty of the hereafter and defender have they none against allah.
the parable of the garden which the righteous are promised beneath it flow rivers perpetual is the enjoyment thereof and the shade therein such is the end of the righteous and the end of unbelievers in the fire.
those to whom we have given the book rejoice at what hath been revealed unto thee but there are among the clans those who reject a part thereof. say i am commanded to worship allah and not to join partners with him. unto him do i call and unto him is my return.
thus have we revealed it to be a judgment of authority in arabic. wert thou to follow their vain desires after the knowledge which hath reached thee then wouldst thou find neither protector nor defender against allah.
we did send messengers before thee and appointed for them wives and children and it was never the part of a messenger to bring a sign except as allah permitted or commanded. for each period is a book revealed.
allah doth blot out or confirm what he pleaseth with him is the mother of the book.
whether we shall show thee within thy lifetime part of what we promised them or take to ourselves thy soul before it is all accomplishedname
see they not that we gradually reduce the land in their control from its outlying borders where allah commands there is none to put back his command and he is swift in calling to account.
those before them did also devise plots but in all things the masterplanning is allahxbs he knoweth the doings of every soul and soon will the unbelievers know who gets home in the end.
the unbelievers say no messenger art thou. say enough for a witness between me and you is allah and such as have knowledge of the book.
a. l. r. a book which we have revealed unto thee in order that thou mightest lead mankind out of the depths of darkness into light  by the leave of their lord  to the way of him the exalted in power worthy of all praise
of allah to whom do belong all things in the heavens and on earth but alas for the unbelievers for a terrible penalty their unfaith will bring them
those who love the life of this world more than the hereafter who hinder men from the path of allah and seek therein something crooked they are astray by a long distance.
we sent not a messenger except to teach in the language of his own people in order to make things clear to them. now allah leaves straying those whom he pleases and guides whom he pleases and he is exalted in power full of wisdom.
we sent moses with our signs and the command. bring out thy people from the depths of darkness into light and teach them to remember the days of allah. verily in this there are signs for such as are firmly patient and constantname
remember moses said to his people call to mind the favour of allah to you when he delivered you from the people of pharaoh they set you hard tasks and punishments slaughtered your sons and let your womenfolk live therein was a tremendous trial from your lord.
and remember your lord caused to be declared publicly if ye are grateful i will add more favours unto you but if ye show ingratitude truly my punishment is terrible indeed.
and moses said if ye show ingratitude ye and all on earth together yet is allah free of all wants worthy of all praise.
has not the story reached you o people of those who went before you  of the people of noah and xbad and thamud  and of those who came after them none knows them but allah. to them came messengers with clear signs but they put their hands up to their mouths and said we do deny the mission on which ye have been sent and we are really in suspicious disquieting doubt as to that to which ye invite us.
their messengers said is there a doubt about allah the creator of the heavens and the earth it is he who invites you in order that he may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a term appointed they said ah ye are no more than human like ourselves ye wish to turn us away from the gods our fathers used to worship then bring us some clear authority.
their messengers said to them true we are human like yourselves but allah doth grant his grace to such of his servants as he pleases. it is not for us to bring you an authority except as allah permits. and on allah let all men of faith put their trust.
no reason have we why we should not put our trust on allah. indeed he has guided us to the ways we follow. we shall certainly bear with patience all the hurt you may cause us. for those who put their trust should put their trust on allah.
and the unbelievers said to their messengers be sure we shall drive you out of our land or ye shall return to our religion. but their lord inspired this message to them verily we shall cause the wrongdoers to perish
and verily we shall cause you to abide in the land and succeed them. this for such as fear the time when they shall stand before my tribunal such as fear the punishment denounced.
but they sought victory and decision there and then and frustration was the lot of every powerful obstinate transgressor.
in front of such a one is hell and he is given for drink boiling fetid water.
in gulps will he sip it but never will he be near swallowing it down his throat death will come to him from every quarter yet will he not die and in front of him will be a chastisement unrelenting.
the parable of those who reject their lord is that their works are as ashes on which the wind blows furiously on a tempestuous day no power have they over aught that they have earned that is the straying far far from the goal.
seest thou not that allah created the heavens and the earth in truth if he so will he can remove you and put in your place a new creation
nor is that for allah any great matter.
they will all be marshalled before allah together then will the weak say to those who were arrogant for us we but followed you can ye then avail us to all against the wrath of allah they will reply if we had received the guidance of allah we should have given it to you to us it makes no difference now whether we rage or bear these torments with patience for ourselves there is no way of escape.
and satan will say when the matter is decided it was allah who gave you a promise of truth i too promised but i failed in my promise to you. i had no authority over you except to call you but ye listened to me then reproach not me but reproach your own souls. i cannot listen to your cries nor can ye listen to mine. i reject your former act in associating me with allah. for wrongdoers there must be a grievous penalty.
but those who believe and work righteousness will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow to dwell therein for aye with the leave of their lord. their greeting therein will be peace
seest thou not how allah sets forth a parable  a goodly word like a goodly tree whose root is firmly fixed and its branches reach to the heavensname in order that they may receive admonition.
it brings forth its fruit at all times by the leave of its lord. so allah sets forth parables for men in order that they may receive admonition.
and the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree it is torn up by the root from the surface of the earth it has no stability.
allah will establish in strength those who believe with the word that stands firm in this world and in the hereafter but allah will leave to stray those who do wrong allah doeth what he willeth.
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who have changed the favour of allah. into blasphemy and caused their people to descend to the house of perdition
into hell they will burn therein an evil place to stay in
and they set up idols as equal to allah to mislead men from the path say enjoy your brief power but verily ye are making straightway for hell
speak to my servants who have believed that they may establish regular prayers and spend in charity out of the sustenance we have given them secretly and openly before the coming of a day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending.
it is allah who hath created the heavens and the earth and sendeth down rain from the skies and with it bringeth out fruits wherewith to feed you it is he who hath made the ships subject to you that they may sail through the sea by his command and the rivers also hath he made subject to you.
and he hath made subject to you the sun and the moon both diligently pursuing their courses and the night and the day hath he also made subject to you.
and he giveth you of all that ye ask for. but if ye count the favours of allah never will ye be able to number them. verily man is given up to injustice and ingratitude.
remember abraham said o my lord make this city one of peace and security and preserve me and my sons from worshipping idols.
o my lord they have indeed led astray many among mankind he then who follows my ways is of me and he that disobeys mename most merciful.
o our lord i have made some of my offspring to dwell in a valley without cultivation by thy sacred house in order o our lord that they may establish regular prayer so fill the hearts of some among men with love towards them and feed them with fruits so that they may give thanks.
o our lord truly thou dost know what we conceal and what we reveal for nothing whatever is hidden from allah whether on earth or in heaven.
praise be to allah who hath granted unto me in old age ismaxbil and isaac for truly my lord is he the hearer of prayer
o my lord make me one who establishes regular prayer and also raise such among my offspring o our lord and accept thou my prayer.
o our lord cover us with thy forgiveness  me my parents and all believers on the day that the reckoning will be established
think not that allah doth not heed the deeds of those who do wrong. he but giveth them respite against a day when the eyes will fixedly stare in horror
they running forward with necks outstretched their heads uplifted their gaze returning not towards them and their hearts a gaping void
so warn mankind of the day when the wrath will reach them then will the wrongdoers say our lord respite us if only for a short term we will answer thy call and follow the messengers what were ye not wont to swear aforetime that ye should suffer no decline
and ye dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged their own souls ye were clearly shown how we dealt with them and we put forth many parables in your behoof
mighty indeed were the plots which they made but their plots were well within the sight of allah even though they were such as to shake the hills
never think that allah would fail his messengers in his promise for allah is exalted in power  the lord of retribution.
one day the earth will be changed to a different earth and so will be the heavens and men will be marshalled forth before allah the one the irresistible
and thou wilt see the sinners that day bound together in fetters
their garments of liquid pitch and their faces covered with fire
that allah may requite each soul according to its deserts and verily allah is swift in calling to account.
here is a message for mankind let them take warning therefrom and let them know that he is no other than one allah let men of understanding take heed.
a. l. r. these are the ayats of revelationname
again and again will those who disbelieve wish that they had bowed to allahxbs will in islam.
leave them alone to enjoy the good things of this life and to please themselves let false hope amuse them soon will knowledge undeceive them.
never did we destroy a population that had not a term decreed and assigned beforehand.
neither can a people anticipate its term nor delay it.
they say o thou to whom the message is being revealed truly thou art mad or possessed
why bringest thou not angels to us if it be that thou hast the truth
we send not the angels down except for just cause if they came to the ungodly behold no respite would they have
we have without doubt sent down the message and we will assuredly guard it from corruption.
we did send messengers before thee amongst the religious sects of old
but never came a messenger to them but they mocked him.
even so do we let it creep into the hearts of the sinners 
that they should not believe in the message but the ways of the ancients have passed away.
even if we opened out to them a gate from heaven and they were to continue all day ascending therein
they would only say our eyes have been intoxicated nay we have been bewitched by sorcery.
it is we who have set out the zodiacal signs in the heavens and made them fairseeming to all beholders
and moreover we have guarded them from every cursed devil
but any that gains a hearing by stealth is pursued by a flaming fire bright to see.
and the earth we have spread out like a carpet set thereon mountains firm and immovable and produced therein all kinds of things in due balance.
and we have provided therein means of subsistencename
and there is not a thing but its sources and treasures inexhaustible are with us but we only send down thereof in due and ascertainable measures.
and we send the fecundating winds then cause the rain to descend from the sky therewith providing you with water in abundance though ye are not the guardians of its stores.
and verily it is we who give life and who give death it is we who remain inheritors after all else passes away.
to us are known those of you who hasten forward and those who lag behind.
assuredly it is thy lord who will gather them together for he is perfect in wisdom and knowledge.
we created man from sounding clay from mud moulded into shape
and the jinn race we had created before from the fire of a scorching wind.
behold thy lord said to the angels i am about to create man from sounding clay from mud moulded into shape
when i have fashioned him in due proportion and breathed into him of my spirit fall ye down in obeisance unto him.
so the angels prostrated themselves all of them together
not so iblis he refused to be among those who prostrated themselves.
allah said o iblis what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves
iblis said i am not one to prostrate myself to man whom thou didst create from sounding clay from mud moulded into shape.
allah said then get thee out from here for thou art rejected accursed.
and the curse shall be on thee till the day of judgment.
iblis said o my lord give me then respite till the day the dead are raised.
allah said respite is granted thee
till the day of the time appointed.
iblis said o my lord because thou hast put me in the wrong i will make wrong fairseeming to them on the earth and i will put them all in the wrong
except thy servants among them sincere and purified by thy grace.
allah said this way of my sincere servants is indeed a way that leads straight to me.
for over my servants no authority shalt thou have except such as put themselves in the wrong and follow thee.
and verily hell is the promised abode for them all
to it are seven gates for each of those gates is a special class of sinners assigned.
the righteous will be amid gardens and fountains of clearflowing water.
their greeting will be enter ye here in peace and security.
and we shall remove from their hearts any lurking sense of injury they will be brothers joyfully facing each other on thrones of dignity.
there no sense of fatigue shall touch them nor shall they ever be asked to leave.
tell my servants that i am indeed the oftforgiving most merciful
and that my penalty will be indeed the most grievous penalty.
tell them about the guests of abraham.
when they entered his presence and said peace he said we feel afraid of you
they said fear not we give thee glad tidings of a son endowed with wisdom.
he said do ye give me glad tidings that old age has seized me of what then is your good news
they said we give thee glad tidings in truth be not then in despair
he said and who despairs of the mercy of his lord but such as go astray
abraham said what then is the business on which ye have come o ye messengers of allah
they said we have been sent to a people deep in sin
excepting the adherents of lut them we are certainly charged to save from harm all 
except his wife who we have ascertained will be among those who will lag behind.
at length when the messengers arrived among the adherents of lut
he said ye appear to be uncommon folk.
they said yea we have come to thee to accomplish that of which they doubt.
we have brought to thee that which is inevitably due and assuredly we tell the truth.
then travel by night with thy household when a portion of the night yet remains and do thou bring up the rear let no one amongst you look back but pass on whither ye are ordered.
and we made known this decree to him that the last remnants of those sinners should be cut off by the morning.
the inhabitants of the city came in mad joy at news of the young men.
lut said these are my guests disgrace me not
but fear allah and shame me not.
they said did we not forbid thee to speak for all and sundry
he said there are my daughters to marry if ye must act so.
verily by thy life o prophet in their wild intoxication they wander in distraction to and fro.
but the mighty blast overtook them before morning
and we turned the cities upside down and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay.
behold in this are signs for those who by tokens do understand.
and the cities were right on the highroad.
behold in this is a sign for those who believed.
and the companions of the wood were also wrongdoers
so we exacted retribution from them. they were both on an open highway plain to see.
the companions of the rocky tract also rejected the messengers
we sent them our signs but they persisted in turning away from them.
out of the mountains did they hew their edifices feeling themselves secure.
but the mighty blast seized them of a morning
and of no avail to them was all that they did with such art and care
we created not the heavens the earth and all between them but for just ends. and the hour is surely coming when this will be manifest. so overlook any human faults with gracious forgiveness.
for verily it is thy lord who is the mastercreator knowing all things.
and we have bestowed upon thee the seven oftrepeated verses and the grand qurxban.
strain not thine eyes. wistfully at what we have bestowed on certain classes of them nor grieve over them but lower thy wing in gentleness to the believers.
and say i am indeed he that warneth openly and without ambiguity
of just such wrath as we sent down on those who divided scripture into arbitrary parts
so also on such as have made qurxban into shreds as they please.
therefore by the lord we will of a surety call them to account

he has created the heavens and the earth for just ends far is he above having the partners they ascribe to him
he has created man from a spermdrop and behold this same man becomes an open disputer
and cattle he has created for you men from them ye derive warmth and numerous benefits and of their meat ye eat.
and ye have a sense of pride and beauty in them as ye drive them home in the evening and as ye lead them forth to pasture in the morning.
and they carry your heavy loads to lands that ye could not otherwise reach except with souls distressed for your lord is indeed most kind most merciful
and he has created horses mules and donkeys for you to ride and use for show and he has created other things of which ye have no knowledge.
and unto allah leads straight the way but there are ways that turn aside if allah had willed he could have guided all of you.
it is he who sends down rain from the sky from it ye drink and out of it grows the vegetation on which ye feed your cattle.
with it he produces for you corn olives datepalms grapes and every kind of fruit verily in this is a sign for those who give thought.
he has made subject to you the night and the day the sun and the moon and the stars are in subjection by his command verily in this are signs for men who are wise.
and the things on this earth which he has multiplied in varying colours and qualities verily in this is a sign for men who celebrate the praises of allah in gratitude.
it is he who has made the sea subject that ye may eat thereof flesh that is fresh and tender and that ye may extract therefrom ornaments to wear and thou seest the ships therein that plough the waves that ye may seek thus of the bounty of allah and that ye may be grateful.
and he has set up on the earth mountains standing firm lest it should shake with you and rivers and roads that ye may guide yourselves
and marks and signposts and by the stars men guide themselves.
is then he who creates like one that creates not will ye not receive admonition
if ye would count up the favours of allah never would ye be able to number them for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
and allah doth know what ye conceal and what ye reveal.
those whom they invoke besides allah create nothing and are themselves created.
they are things dead lifeless nor do they know when they will be raised up.
your allah is one allah as to those who believe not in the hereafter their hearts refuse to know and they are arrogant.
undoubtedly allah doth know what they conceal and what they reveal verily he loveth not the arrogant.
when it is said to them what is it that your lord has revealed they say tales of the ancients
let them bear on the day of judgment their own burdens in full and also something of the burdens of those without knowledge whom they misled. alas how grievous the burdens they will bear
those before them did also plot against allahxbs way but allah took their structures from their foundations and the roof fell down on them from above and the wrath seized them from directions they did not perceive.
then on the day of judgment he will cover them with shame and say where are my xbpartnersxb concerning whom ye used to dispute with the godly those endued with knowledge will say this day indeed are the unbelievers covered with shame and misery
namely those whose lives the angels take in a state of wrongdoing to their own souls. then would they offer submission with the pretence we did no evil knowingly. the angels will reply nay but verily allah knoweth all that ye did
so enter the gates of hell to dwell therein. thus evil indeed is the abode of the arrogant.
to the righteous when it is said what is it that your lord has revealed they say all that is good. to those who do good there is good in this world and the home of the hereafter is even better and excellent indeed is the home of the righteous
gardens of eternity which they will enter beneath them flow pleasant rivers they will have therein all that they wish thus doth allah reward the righteous
namely those whose lives the angels take in a state of purity saying to them peace be on you enter ye the garden because of the good which ye did in the world.
do the ungodly wait until the angels come to them or there comes the command of thy lord for their doom so did those who went before them. but allah wronged them not nay they wronged their own souls.
but the evil results of their deeds overtook them and that very wrath at which they had scoffed hemmed them in.
the worshippers of false gods say if allah had so willed we should not have worshipped aught but him  neither we nor our fathers nor should we have prescribed prohibitions other than his. so did those who went before them. but what is the mission of messengers but to preach the clear message
for we assuredly sent amongst every people a messenger with the command serve allah and eschew evil of the people were some whom allah guided and some on whom error became inevitably established. so travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who denied the truth.
if thou art anxious for their guidance yet allah guideth not such as he leaves to stray and there is none to help them.
they swear their strongest oaths by allah that allah will not raise up those who die nay but it is a promise binding on him in truth but most among mankind realise it not.
they must be raised up in order that he may manifest to them the truth of that wherein they differ and that the rejecters of truth may realise that they had indeed surrendered to falsehood.
for to anything which we have willed we but say the word be and it is.
to those who leave their homes in the cause of allah after suffering oppression we will assuredly give a goodly home in this world but truly the reward of the hereafter will be greater. if they only realised this
they are those who persevere in patience and put their trust on their lord.
and before thee also the messengers we sent were but men to whom we granted inspiration if ye realise this not ask of those who possess the message.
we sent them with clear signs and books of dark prophecies and we have sent down unto thee also the message that thou mayest explain clearly to men what is sent for them and that they may give thought.
do then those who devise evil plots feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them up or that the wrath will not seize them from directions they little perceive
or that he may not call them to account in the midst of their goings to and fro without a chance of their frustrating him
or that he may not call them to account by a process of slow wastage  for thy lord is indeed full of kindness and mercy.
do they not look at allahxbs creation even among inanimate thingsname from the right and the left prostrating themselves to allah and that in the humblest manner
and to allah doth obeisance all that is in the heavens and on earth whether moving living creatures or the angels for none are arrogant before their lord.
they all revere their lord high above them and they do all that they are commanded.
allah has said take not for worship two gods for he is just one allah then fear me and me alone.
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and on earth and to him is duty due always then will ye fear other than allah
and ye have no good thing but is from allah and moreover when ye are touched by distress unto him ye cry with groans
yet when he removes the distress from you behold some of you turn to other gods to join with their lord
as if to show their ingratitude for the favours we have bestowed on them then enjoy your brief day but soon will ye know your folly
and they even assign to things they do not know a portion out of that which we have bestowed for their sustenance by allah ye shall certainly be called to account for your false inventions.
and they assign daughters for allah  glory be to him  and for themselves sons the issue they desire
when news is brought to one of them of the birth of a female child his face darkens and he is filled with inward grief
with shame does he hide himself from his people because of the bad news he has had shall he retain it on sufferance and contempt or bury it in the dust ah what an evil choice they decide on
to those who believe not in the hereafter applies the similitude of evil to allah applies the highest similitude for he is the exalted in power full of wisdom.
if allah were to punish men for their wrongdoing he would not leave on the earth a single living creature but he gives them respite for a stated term when their term expires they would not be able to delay the punishment for a single hour just as they would not be able to anticipate it for a single hour.
they attribute to allah what they hate for themselves and their tongues assert the falsehood that all good things are for themselves without doubt for them is the fire and they will be the first to be hastened on into it
by allah we also sent our messengers to peoples before thee but satan made to the wicked their own acts seem alluring he is also their patron today but they shall have a most grievous penalty.
and we sent down the book to thee for the express purpose that thou shouldst make clear to them those things in which they differ and that it should be a guide and a mercy to those who believe.
and allah sends down rain from the skies and gives therewith life to the earth after its death verily in this is a sign for those who listen.
and verily in cattle too will ye find an instructive sign. from what is within their bodies between excretions and blood we produce for your drink milk pure and agreeable to those who drink it.
and from the fruit of the datepalm and the vine ye get out wholesome drink and food behold in this also is a sign for those who are wise.
and thy lord taught the bee to build its cells in hills on trees and in menxbs habitations
then to eat of all the produce of the earth and find with skill the spacious paths of its lord there issues from within their bodies a drink of varying colours wherein is healing for men verily in this is a sign for those who give thought.
it is allah who creates you and takes your souls at death and of you there are some who are sent back to a feeble age so that they know nothing after having known much for allah is allknowing allpowerful.
allah has bestowed his gifts of sustenance more freely on some of you than on others those more favoured are not going to throw back their gifts to those whom their right hands possess so as to be equal in that respect. will they then deny the favours of allah
and allah has made for you mates and companions of your own nature and made for you out of them sons and daughters and grandchildren and provided for you sustenance of the best will they then believe in vain things and be ungrateful for allahxbs favours
and worship others than allahname for sustenance with anything in heavens or earth and cannot possibly have such power
invent not similitudes for allah for allah knoweth and ye know not.
allah sets forth the parable of two men one a slave under the dominion of another he has no power of any sort and the other a man on whom we have bestowed goodly favours from ourselves and he spends thereof freely privately and publicly are the two equal by no means praise be to allah. but most of them understand not.
allah sets forth another parable of two men one of them dumb with no power of any sort a wearisome burden is he to his master whichever way be directs him he brings no good is such a man equal with one who commands justice and is on a straight way
to allah belongeth the mystery of the heavens and the earth. and the decision of the hour of judgment is as the twingkling of an eye or even quicker for allah hath power over all things.
it is he who brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when ye knew nothing and he gave you hearing and sight and intelligence and affections that ye may give thanks to allah.
do they not look at the birds held poised in the midst of the air and the sky nothing holds them up but the power of allah. verily in this are signs for those who believe.
it is allah who made your habitations homes of rest and quiet for you and made for you out of the skins of animals tents for dwellings which ye find so light and handy when ye travel and when ye stop in your travels and out of their wool and their soft fibres between wool and hair and their hair rich stuff and articles of convenience to serve you for a time.
it is allah who made out of the things he created some things to give you shade of the hills he made some for your shelter he made you garments to protect you from heat and coats of mail to protect you from your mutual violence. thus does he complete his favours on you that ye may bow to his will in islam.
but if they turn away thy duty is only to preach the clear message.
they recognise the favours of allah then they deny them and most of them are creatures ungrateful.
one day we shall raise from all peoples a witness then will no excuse be accepted from unbelievers nor will they receive any favours.
when the wrongdoers actually see the penalty then will it in no way be mitigated nor will they then receive respite.
when those who gave partners to allah will see their partners they will say our lord these are our xbpartnersxb those whom we used to invoke besides thee. but they will throw back their word at them and say indeed ye are liars
that day shall they openly show their submission to allah and all their inventions shall leave them in the lurch.
those who reject allah and hinder men from the path of allah  for them will we add penalty to penalty for that they used to spread mischief.
one day we shall raise from all peoples a witness against them from amongst themselves and we shall bring thee as a witness against these thy people and we have sent down to thee the book explaining all things a guide a mercy and glad tidings to muslims.
allah commands justice the doing of good and liberality to kith and kin and he forbids all shameful deeds and injustice and rebellion he instructs you that ye may receive admonition.
fulfil the covenant of allah when ye have entered into it and break not your oaths after ye have confirmed them indeed ye have made allah your surety for allah knoweth all that ye do.
and be not like a woman who breaks into untwisted strands the yarn which she has spun after it has become strong. nor take your oaths to practise deception between yourselves lest one party should be more numerous than another for allah will test you by this and on the day of judgment he will certainly make clear to you the truth of that wherein ye disagree.
if allah so willed he could make you all one people but he leaves straying whom he pleases and he guides whom he pleases but ye shall certainly be called to account for all your actions.
and take not your oaths to practise deception between yourselves with the result that someonexbs foot may slip after it was firmly planted and ye may have to taste the evil consequences of having hindered men from the path of allah and a mighty wrath descend on you.
nor sell the covenant of allah for a miserable price for with allah is a prize far better for you if ye only knew.
what is with you must vanish what is with allah will endure. and we will certainly bestow on those who patiently persevere their reward according to the best of their actions.
whoever works righteousness man or woman and has faith verily to him will we give a new life a life that is good and pure and we will bestow on such their reward according to the best of their actions.
when thou dost read the qurxban seek allahxbs protection from satan the rejected one.
no authority has he over those who believe and put their trust in their lord.
his authority is over those only who take him as patron and who join partners with allah.
when we substitute one revelation for anothernamename thou art but a forger but most of them understand not.
say the holy spirit has brought the revelation from thy lord in truth in order to strengthen those who believe and as a guide and glad tidings to muslims.
we know indeed that they say it is a man that teaches him. the tongue of him they wickedly point to is notably foreign while this is arabic pure and clear.
those who believe not in the signs of allahname and theirs will be a grievous penalty.
it is those who believe not in the signs of allah that forge falsehood it is they who lie
any one who after accepting faith in allah utters unbeliefname his heart remaining firm in faith  but such as open their breast to unbelief on them is wrath from allah and theirs will be a dreadful penalty.
this because they love the life of this world better than the hereafter and allah will not guide those who reject faith.
those are they whose hearts ears and eyes allah has sealed up and they take no heed.
without doubt in the hereafter they will perish.
but verily thy lordnamenamename after all this is oftforgiving most merciful.
one day every soul will come up struggling for itself and every soul will be recompensed fully for all its actions and none will be unjustly dealt with.
allah sets forth a parable a city enjoying security and quiet abundantly supplied with sustenance from every place yet was it ungrateful for the favours of allah so allah made it taste of hunger and terror in extremes closing in on it like a garment from every side because of the evil which its people wrought.
and there came to them a messenger from among themselves but they falsely rejected him so the wrath seized them even in the midst of their iniquities.
so eat of the sustenance which allah has provided for you lawful and good and be grateful for the favours of allah if it is he whom ye serve.
he has only forbidden you dead meat and blood and the flesh of swine and any food over which the name of other than allah has been invoked. but if one is forced by necessity without wilful disobedience nor transgressing due limitsname most merciful.
but say not  for any false thing that your tongues may put forth this is lawful and this is forbidden so as to ascribe false things to allah. for those who ascribe false things to allah will never prosper.
in such falsehood is but a paltry profit but they will have a most grievous penalty.
to the jews we prohibited such things as we have mentioned to thee before we did them no wrong but they were used to doing wrong to themselves.
but verily thy lord to those who do wrong in ignorance but who thereafter repent and make amends thy lord after all this is oftforgiving most merciful.
abraham was indeed a model devoutly obedient to allah and true in faith and he joined not gods with allah
he showed his gratitude for the favours of allah who chose him and guided him to a straight way.
and we gave him good in this world and he will be in the hereafter in the ranks of the righteous.
so we have taught thee the inspired message follow the ways of abraham the true in faith and he joined not gods with allah.
the sabbath was only made strict for those who disagreed as to its observance but allah will judge between them on the day of judgment as to their differences.
invite all to the way of thy lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching and argue with them in ways that are best and most gracious for thy lord knoweth best who have strayed from his path and who receive guidance.
and if ye do catch them out catch them out no worse than they catch you out but if ye show patience that is indeed the best course for those who are patient.
and do thou be patient for thy patience is but from allah nor grieve over them and distress not thyself because of their plots.
for allah is with those who restrain themselves and those who do good.
glory to allah who did take his servant for a journey by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque whose precincts we did bless in order that we might show him some of our signs for he is the one who heareth and seeth all things.
we gave moses the book and made it a guide to the children of israel commanding take not other than me as disposer of your affairs.
o ye that are sprung from those whom we carried in the ark with noah verily he was a devotee most grateful.
and we gave clear warning to the children of israel in the book that twice would they do mischief on the earth and be elated with mighty arrogance and twice would they be punished
when the first of the warnings came to pass we sent against you our servants given to terrible warfare they entered the very inmost parts of your homes and it was a warning completely fulfilled.
then did we grant you the return as against them we gave you increase in resources and sons and made you the more numerous in manpower.
if ye did well ye did well for yourselves if ye did evil ye did it against yourselves. so when the second of the warnings came to pass we permitted your enemies to disfigure your faces and to enter your temple as they had entered it before and to visit with destruction all that fell into their power.
it may be that your lord may yet show mercy unto you but if ye revert to your sins we shall revert to our punishments and we have made hell a prison for those who reject all faith.
verily this qurxban doth guide to that which is most right or stable and giveth the glad tidings to the believers who work deeds of righteousness that they shall have a magnificent reward
and to those who believe not in the hereafter it announceth that we have prepared for them a penalty grievous indeed.
the prayer that man should make for good he maketh for evil for man is given to hasty deeds.
we have made the night and the day as two of our signs the sign of the night have we obscured while the sign of the day we have made to enlighten you that ye may seek bounty from your lord and that ye may know the number and count of the years all things have we explained in detail.
every manxbs fate we have fastened on his own neck on the day of judgment we shall bring out for him a scroll which he will see spread open.
it will be said to him read thine own record sufficient is thy soul this day to make out an account against thee.
who receiveth guidance receiveth it for his own benefit who goeth astray doth so to his own loss no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another nor would we visit with our wrath until we had sent an messenger to give warning.
when we decide to destroy a population we first send a definite order to those among them who are given the good things of this life and yet transgress so that the word is proved true against them then it is we destroy them utterly.
how many generations have we destroyed after noah and enough is thy lord to note and see the sins of his servants.
if any do wish for the transitory things of this life we readily grant them  such things as we will to such person as we will in the end have we provided hell for them they will burn therein disgraced and rejected.
those who do wish for the things of the hereafter and strive therefor with all due striving and have faith they are the ones whose striving is acceptable to allah.
of the bounties of thy lord we bestow freely on all these as well as those the bounties of thy lord are not closed to anyone.
see how we have bestowed more on some than on others but verily the hereafter is more in rank and gradation and more in excellence.
take not with allah another object of worship or thou o man wilt sit in disgrace and destitution.
thy lord hath decreed that ye worship none but him and that ye be kind to parents. whether one or both of them attain old age in thy life say not to them a word of contempt nor repel them but address them in terms of honour.
and out of kindness lower to them the wing of humility and say my lord bestow on them thy mercy even as they cherished me in childhood.
your lord knoweth best what is in your hearts if ye do deeds of righteousness verily he is most forgiving to those who turn to him again and again in true penitence.
and render to the kindred their due rights as also to those in want and to the wayfarer but squander not your wealth in the manner of a spendthrift.
verily spendthrifts are brothers of the evil ones and the evil one is to his lord himself ungrateful.
and even if thou hast to turn away from them in pursuit of the mercy from thy lord which thou dost expect yet speak to them a word of easy kindness.
make not thy hand tied like a niggardxbs to thy neck nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach so that thou become blameworthy and destitute.
verily thy lord doth provide sustenance in abundance for whom he pleaseth and he provideth in a just measure. for he doth know and regard all his servants.
kill not your children for fear of want we shall provide sustenance for them as well as for you. verily the killing of them is a great sin.
nor come nigh to adultery for it is a shameful deed and an evil opening the road to other evils.
nor take life  which allah has made sacred  except for just cause. and if anyone is slain wrongfully we have given his heir authority to demand qisas or to forgive but let him not exceed bounds in the matter of taking life for he is helped by the law.
come not nigh to the orphanxbs property except to improve it until he attains the age of full strength and fulfil every engagement for every engagement will be enquired into on the day of reckoning.
give full measure when ye measure and weigh with a balance that is straight that is the most fitting and the most advantageous in the final determination.
and pursue not that of which thou hast no knowledge for every act of hearing or of seeing or of feeling in the heart will be enquired into on the day of reckoning.
nor walk on the earth with insolence for thou canst not rend the earth asunder nor reach the mountains in height.
of all such things the evil is hateful in the sight of thy lord.
these are among the precepts of wisdom which thy lord has revealed to thee. take not with allah another object of worship lest thou shouldst be thrown into hell blameworthy and rejected.
has then your lord o pagans preferred for you sons and taken for himself daughters among the angels truly ye utter a most dreadful saying
we have explained things in various ways in this qurxban in order that they may receive admonition but it only increases their flight from the truth
say if there had been other gods with him as they sayname they would certainly have sought out a way to the lord of the throne
glory to him he is high above all that they say exalted and great beyond measure
the seven heavens and the earth and all beings therein declare his glory there is not a thing but celebrates his praise and yet ye understand not how they declare his glory verily he is oftforbear most forgiving
when thou dost recite the qurxban we put between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a veil invisible
and we put coverings over their hearts and minds lest they should understand the qurxban and deafness into their ears when thou dost commemorate thy lord and him alone in the qurxban they turn on their backs fleeing from the truth.
we know best why it is they listen when they listen to thee and when they meet in private conference behold the wicked say ye follow none other than a man bewitched
see what similes they strike for thee but they have gone astray and never can they find a way.
they say what when we are reduced to bones and dust should we really be raised up to be a new creation
say nay be ye stones or iron
or created matter which in your minds is hardest to be raised up yet shall ye be raised up then will they say who will cause us to return say he who created you first then will they wag their heads towards thee and say when will that be say may be it will be quite soon
it will be on a day when he will call you and ye will answer his call with words of his praise and ye will think that ye tarried but a little while
say to my servants that they should only say those things that are best for satan doth sow dissensions among them for satan is to man an avowed enemy.
it is your lord that knoweth you best if he please he granteth you mercy or if he please punishment we have not sent thee to be a disposer of their affairs for them.
and it is your lord that knoweth best all beings that are in the heavens and on earth we did bestow on some prophets more and other gifts than on others and we gave to david the gift of the psalms.
say call on those  besides him  whom ye fancy they have neither the power to remove your troubles from you nor to change them.
those whom they call upon do desire for themselves means of access to their lord  even those who are nearest they hope for his mercy and fear his wrath for the wrath of thy lord is something to take heed of.
there is not a population but we shall destroy it before the day of judgment or punish it with a dreadful penalty that is written in the eternal record.
and we refrain from sending the signs only because the men of former generations treated them as false we sent the shecamel to the thamud to open their eyes but they treated her wrongfully we only send the signs by way of terror and warning from evil.
behold we told thee that thy lord doth encompass mankind round about we granted the vision which we showed thee but as a trial for menname but it only increases their inordinate transgression
behold we said to the angels bow down unto adam they bowed down except iblis he said shall i bow down to one whom thou didst create from clay
he said seest thou this is the one whom thou hast honoured above me if thou wilt but respite me to the day of judgment i will surely bring his descendants under my sway  all but a few
allah said go thy way if any of them follow thee verily hell will be the recompense of you all an ample recompense.
lead to destruction those whom thou canst among them with thy seductive voice make assaults on them with thy cavalry and thy infantry mutually share with them wealth and children and make promises to them. but satan promises them nothing but deceit.
as for my servants no authority shalt thou have over them enough is thy lord for a disposer of affairs.
your lord is he that maketh the ship go smoothly for you through the sea in order that ye may seek of his bounty. for he is unto you most merciful.
when distress seizes you at sea those that ye call upon  besides himself  leave you in the lurch but when he brings you back safe to land ye turn away from him. most ungrateful is man
do ye then feel secure that he will not cause you to be swallowed up beneath the earth when ye are on land or that he will not send against you a violent tornado with showers of stones so that ye shall find no one to carry out your affairs for you
or do ye feel secure that he will not send you back a second time to sea and send against you a heavy gale to drown you because of your ingratitude so that ye find no helper. therein against us
we have honoured the sons of adam provided them with transport on land and sea given them for sustenance things good and pure and conferred on them special favours above a great part of our creation.
one day we shall call together all human beings with their respective imams those who are given their record in their right hand will read it with pleasure and they will not be dealt with unjustly in the least.
but those who were blind in this world will be blind in the hereafter and most astray from the path.
and their purpose was to tempt thee away from that which we had revealed unto thee to substitute in our name something quite different in that case behold they would certainly have made thee their friend
and had we not given thee strength thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little.
in that case we should have made thee taste an equal portion of punishment in this life and an equal portion in death and moreover thou wouldst have found none to help thee against us
their purpose was to scare thee off the land in order to expel thee but in that case they would not have stayed therein after thee except for a little while.
this was our way with the messengers we sent before thee thou wilt find no change in our ways.
establish regular prayers  at the sunxbs decline till the darkness of the night and the morning prayer and reading for the prayer and reading in the morning carry their testimony.
and pray in the small watches of the morning it would be an additional prayer or spiritual profit for thee soon will thy lord raise thee to a station of praise and glory
say o my lord let my entry be by the gate of truth and honour and likewise my exit by the gate of truth and honour and grant me from thy presence an authority to aid me.
and say truth has now arrived and falsehood perished for falsehood is by its nature bound to perish.
we send down stage by stage in the qurxban that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe to the unjust it causes nothing but loss after loss.
yet when we bestow our favours on man he turns away and becomes remote on his side instead of coming to us and when evil seizes him he gives himself up to despair
say everyone acts according to his own disposition but your lord knows best who it is that is best guided on the way.
they ask thee concerning the spirit of inspiration. say the spirit cometh by command of my lord of knowledge it is only a little that is communicated to you o men
if it were our will we could take away that which we have sent thee by inspirationthen wouldst thou find none to plead thy affair in that matter as against us
except for mercy from thy lord for his bounty is to thee indeed great.
say if the whole of mankind and jinns were to gather together to produce the like of this qurxban they could not produce the like thereof even if they backed up each other with help and support.
and we have explained to man in this qurxban every kind of similitude yet the greater part of men refuse to receive it except with ingratitude
they say we shall not believe in thee until thou cause a spring to gush forth for us from the earth
or until thou have a garden of date trees and vines and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst carrying abundant water
or thou cause the sky to fall in pieces as thou sayest will happen against us or thou bring allah and the angels before us face to face
or thou have a house adorned with gold or thou mount a ladder right into the skies. no we shall not even believe in thy mounting until thou send down to us a book that we could read. say glory to my lord am i aught but a man a messenger
what kept men back from belief when guidance came to them was nothing but this they said has allah sent a man like us to be his messenger
say if there were settled on earth angels walking about in peace and quiet we should certainly have sent them down from the heavens an angel for a messenger.
say enough is allah for a witness between me and you for he is well acquainted with his servants and he sees all things.
it is he whom allah guides that is on true guidance but he whom he leaves astray  for such wilt thou find no protector besides him. on the day of judgment we shall gather them together prone on their faces blind dumb and deaf their abode will be hell every time it shows abatement we shall increase from them the fierceness of the fire.
that is their recompense because they rejected our signs and said when we are reduced to bones and broken dust should we really be raised up to be a new creation
see they not that allah who created the heavens and the earth has power to create the like of them anew only he has decreed a term appointed of which there is no doubt. but the unjust refuse to receive it except with ingratitude.
say if ye had control of the treasures of the mercy of my lord behold ye would keep them back for fear of spending them for man is every niggardly
to moses we did give nine clear signs as the children of israel when he came to them pharaoh said to him o moses i consider thee indeed to have been worked upon by sorcery
moses said thou knowest well that these things have been sent down by none but the lord of the heavens and the earth as eyeopening evidence and i consider thee indeed o pharaoh to be one doomed to destruction
so he resolved to remove them from the face of the earth but we did drown him and all who were with him.
and we said thereafter to the children of israel dwell securely in the land of promise but when the second of the warnings came to pass we gathered you together in a mingled crowd.
we sent down the qurxban in truth and in truth has it descended and we sent thee but to give glad tidings and to warn sinners.
it is a qurxban which we have divided into parts from time to time in order that thou mightest recite it to men at intervals we have revealed it by stages.
say whether ye believe in it or not it is true that those who were given knowledge beforehand when it is recited to them fall down on their faces in humble prostration
and they say xbglory to our lord truly has the promise of our lord been fulfilledxb
they fall down on their faces in tears and it increases their earnest humility.
say call upon allah or call upon rahman by whatever name ye call upon him it is well for to him belong the most beautiful names. neither speak thy prayer aloud nor speak it in a low tone but seek a middle course between.
say praise be to allah who begets no son and has no partner in his dominion nor needs he any to protect him from humiliation yea magnify him for his greatness and glory
praise be to allah who hath sent to his servant the book and hath allowed therein no crookedness
he hath made it straight and clear in order that he may warn the godless of a terrible punishment from him and that he may give glad tidings to the believers who work righteous deeds that they shall have a goodly reward
wherein they shall remain for ever
further that he may warn those also who say allah hath begotten a son
no knowledge have they of such a thing nor had their fathers. it is a grievous thing that issues from their mouths as a saying what they say is nothing but falsehood
thou wouldst only perchance fret thyself to death following after them in grief if they believe not in this message.
that which is on earth we have made but as a glittering show for the earth in order that we may test them  as to which of them are best in conduct.
verily what is on earth we shall make but as dust and dry soil without growth or herbage.
or dost thou reflect that the companions of the cave and of the inscription were wonders among our sign
behold the youths betook themselves to the cave they said our lord bestow on us mercy from thyself and dispose of our affair for us in the right way
then we draw a veil over their ears for a number of years in the cave so that they heard not
then we roused them in order to test which of the two parties was best at calculating the term of years they had tarried
we relate to thee their story in truth they were youths who believed in their lord and we advanced them in guidance
we gave strength to their hearts behold they stood up and said our lord is the lord of the heavens and of the earth never shall we call upon any god other than him if we did we should indeed have uttered an enormity
these our people have taken for worship gods other than him why do they not bring forward an authority clear and convincing for what they do who doth more wrong than such as invent a falsehood against allah
when ye turn away from them and the things they worship other than allah betake yourselves to the cave your lord will shower his mercies on you and disposes of your affair towards comfort and ease.
thou wouldst have seen the sun when it rose declining to the right from their cave and when it set turning away from them to the left while they lay in the open space in the midst of the cave. such are among the signs of allah he whom allah guides is rightly guided but he whom allah leaves to strayname
thou wouldst have deemed them awake whilst they were asleep and we turned them on their right and on their left sides their dog stretching forth his two forelegs on the threshold if thou hadst come up on to them thou wouldst have certainly turned back from them in flight and wouldst certainly have been filled with terror of them.
such being their state we raised them up from sleep that they might question each other. said one of them how long have ye stayed here they said we have stayed perhaps a day or part of a day. at length they all said allah alone knows best how long ye have stayed here.... now send ye then one of you with this money of yours to the town let him find out which is the best food to be had and bring some to you that ye may satisfy your hunger therewith and let him behave with care and courtesy and let him not inform any one about you.
for if they should come upon you they would stone you or force you to return to their cult and in that case ye would never attain prosperity.
thus did we make their case known to the people that they might know that the promise of allah is true and that there can be no doubt about the hour of judgment. behold they dispute among themselves as to their affair. some said construct a building over them their lord knows best about them those who prevailed over their affair said let us surely build a place of worship over them.
some say they were three the dog being the fourth among them others say they were five the dog being the sixth doubtfully guessing at the unknown yet others say they were seven the dog being the eighth. say thou my lord knoweth best their number it is but few that know their real case. enter not therefore into controversies concerning them except on a matter that is clear nor consult any of them about the affair of the sleepers.
nor say of anything i shall be sure to do so and so tomorrow
without adding so please allah and call thy lord to mind when thou forgettest and say i hope that my lord will guide me ever closer even than this to the right road.
so they stayed in their cave three hundred years and some add nine more
say allah knows best how long they stayed with him is the knowledge of the secrets of the heavens and the earth how clearly he sees how finely he hears everything they have no protector other than him nor does he share his command with any person whatsoever.
and recite and teach what has been revealed to thee of the book of thy lord none can change his words and none wilt thou find as a refuge other than him.
and keep thy soul content with those who call on their lord morning and evening seeking his face and let not thine eyes pass beyond them seeking the pomp and glitter of this life no obey any whose heart we have permitted to neglect the remembrance of us one who follows his own desires whose case has gone beyond all bounds.
say the truth is from your lord let him who will believe and let him who will reject it for the wrongdoers we have prepared a fire whose smoke and flames like the walls and roof of a tent will hem them in if they implore relief they will be granted water like melted brass that will scald their faces how dreadful the drink how uncomfortable a couch to recline on
as to those who believe and work righteousness verily we shall not suffer to perish the reward of any who do a single righteous deed.
for them will be gardens of eternity beneath them rivers will flow they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and they will wear green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade they will recline therein on raised thrones. how good the recompense how beautiful a couch to recline on
set forth to them the parable of two men for one of them we provided two gardens of grapevines and surrounded them with date palms in between the two we placed cornfields.
each of those gardens brought forth its produce and failed not in the least therein in the midst of them we caused a river to flow.
abundant was the produce this man had  he said to his companion in the course of a mutual argument more wealth have i than you and more honour and power in my following of men.
he went into his garden in a state of mind unjust to his soul he said i deem not that this will ever perish
nor do i deem that the hour of judgment will ever come even if i am brought back to my lord i shall surely find there something better in exchange.
his companion said to him in the course of the argument with him dost thou deny him who created thee out of dust then out of a spermdrop then fashioned thee into a man
but i think for my part that he is allah my lord and none shall i associate with my lord.
why didst thou not as thou wentest into thy garden say xballahxbs will be done there is no power but with allahxb if thou dost see me less than thee in wealth and sons
it may be that my lord will give me something better than thy garden and that he will send on thy garden thunderbolts by way of reckoning from heaven making it but slippery sand
or the water of the garden will run off underground so that thou wilt never be able to find it.
so his fruits and enjoyment were encompassed with ruin and he remained twisting and turning his hands over what he had spent on his property which had now tumbled to pieces to its very foundations and he could only say woe is me would i had never ascribed partners to my lord and cherisher
nor had he numbers to help him against allah nor was he able to deliver himself.
there the only protection comes from allah the true one. he is the best to reward and the best to give success.
set forth to them the similitude of the life of this world it is like the rain which we send down from the skies the earthxbs vegetation absorbs it but soon it becomes dry stubble which the winds do scatter it is only allah who prevails over all things.
wealth and sons are allurements of the life of this world but the things that endure good deeds are best in the sight of thy lord as rewards and best as the foundation for hopes.
one day we shall remove the mountains and thou wilt see the earth as a level stretch and we shall gather them all together nor shall we leave out any one of them.
and they will be marshalled before thy lord in ranks with the announcement now have ye come to us bare as we created you first aye ye thought we shall not fulfil the appointment made to you to meet us
and the book of deeds will be placed before you and thou wilt see the sinful in great terror because of what is recorded therein they will say ah woe to us what a book is this it leaves out nothing small or great but takes account thereof they will find all that they did placed before them and not one will thy lord treat with injustice.
behold we said to the angels bow down to adam they bowed down except iblis. he was one of the jinns and he broke the command of his lord. will ye then take him and his progeny as protectors rather than me and they are enemies to you evil would be the exchange for the wrongdoers
i called them not to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth nor even their own creation nor is it for helpers such as me to take as lead men astray
one day he will say call on those whom ye thought to be my partners and they will call on them but they will not listen to them and we shall make for them a place of common perdition.
and the sinful shall see the fire and apprehend that they have to fall therein no means will they find to turn away therefrom.
we have explained in detail in this qurxban for the benefit of mankind every kind of similitude but man is in most things contentious.
and what is there to keep back men from believing now that guidance has come to them nor from praying for forgiveness from their lord but that they ask that the ways of the ancients be repeated with them or the wrath be brought to them face to face
we only send the messengers to give glad tidings and to give warnings but the unbelievers dispute with vain argument in order therewith to weaken the truth and they treat my signs as a jest as also the fact that they are warned
and who doth more wrong than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord but turns away from them forgetting the deeds which his hands have sent forth verily we have set veils over their hearts lest they should understand this and over their ears deafness if thou callest them to guidance even then will they never accept guidance.
but your lord is most forgiving full of mercy. if he were to call them at once to account for what they have earned then surely he would have hastened their punishment but they have their appointed time beyond which they will find no refuge.
such were the populations we destroyed when they committed iniquities but we fixed an appointed time for their destruction.
behold moses said to his attendant i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas or until i spend years and years in travel.
but when they reached the junction they forgot about their fish which took its course through the sea straight as in a tunnel.
when they had passed on some distance moses said to his attendant bring us our early meal truly we have suffered much fatigue at this stage of our journey.
he replied sawest thou what happened when we betook ourselves to the rock i did indeed forget about the fish none but satan made me forget to tell you about it it took its course through the sea in a marvellous way
moses said that was what we were seeking after so they went back on their footsteps following the path they had come.
so they found one of our servants on whom we had bestowed mercy from ourselves and whom we had taught knowledge from our own presence.
moses said to him may i follow thee on the footing that thou teach me something of the higher truth which thou hast been taught
the other said verily thou wilt not be able to have patience with me
and how canst thou have patience about things about which thy understanding is not complete
moses said thou wilt find me if allah so will truly patient nor shall i disobey thee in aught.
the other said if then thou wouldst follow me ask me no questions about anything until i myself speak to thee concerning it.
so they both proceeded until when they were in the boat he scuttled it. said moses hast thou scuttled it in order to drown those in it truly a strange thing hast thou done
he answered did i not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me
moses said rebuke me not for forgetting nor grieve me by raising difficulties in my case.
then they proceeded until when they met a young man he slew him. moses said hast thou slain an innocent person who had slain none truly a foul unheard of thing hast thou done
he answered did i not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me
moses said if ever i ask thee about anything after this keep me not in thy company then wouldst thou have received full excuse from my side.
then they proceeded until when they came to the inhabitants of a town they asked them for food but they refused them hospitality. they found there a wall on the point of falling down but he set it up straight. moses said if thou hadst wished surely thou couldst have exacted some recompense for it
he answered this is the parting between me and thee now will i tell thee the interpretation of those things over which thou wast unable to hold patience.
as for the boat it belonged to certain men in dire want they plied on the water i but wished to render it unserviceable for there was after them a certain king who seized on every boat by force.
as for the youth his parents were people of faith and we feared that he would grieve them by obstinate rebellion and ingratitude to allah and man.
so we desired that their lord would give them in exchange a son better in purity of conduct and closer in affection.
as for the wall it belonged to two youths orphans in the town there was beneath it a buried treasure to which they were entitled their father had been a righteous man so thy lord desired that they should attain their age of full strength and get out their treasure  a mercy and favour from thy lord. i did it not of my own accord. such is the interpretation of those things over which thou wast unable to hold patience.
they ask thee concerning zulqarnain. say i will rehearse to you something of his story.
verily we established his power on earth and we gave him the ways and the means to all ends.
one such way he followed
until when he reached the setting of the sun he found it set in a spring of murky water near it he found a people we said o zulqarnain thou hast authority either to punish them or to treat them with kindness.
he said whoever doth wrong him shall we punish then shall he be sent back to his lord and he will punish him with a punishment unheardof before.
but whoever believes and works righteousnessname and easy will be his task as we order it by our command.
then followed he another way
until when he came to the rising of the sun he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no covering protection against the sun.
he left them as they were we completely understood what was before him.
then followed he another way
until when he reached a tract between two mountains he found beneath them a people who scarcely understood a word.
they said o zulqarnain the gog and magog people do great mischief on earth shall we then render thee tribute in order that thou mightest erect a barrier between us and them
he said the power in which my lord has established me is better than tribute help me therefore with strength and labour i will erect a strong barrier between you and them
bring me blocks of iron. at length when he had filled up the space between the two steep mountainsides he said blow with your bellows then when he had made it red as fire he said bring me that i may pour over it molten lead.
thus were they made powerless to scale it or to dig through it.
he said this is a mercy from my lord but when the promise of my lord comes to pass he will make it into dust and the promise of my lord is true.
on that day we shall leave them to surge like waves on one another the trumpet will be blown and we shall collect them all together.
and we shall present hell that day for unbelievers to see all spread out
unbelievers whose eyes had been under a veil from remembrance of me and who had been unable even to hear.
do the unbelievers think that they can take my servants as protectors besides me verily we have prepared hell for the unbelievers for their entertainment.
say shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect of their deeds
those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought that they were acquiring good by their works
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the fact of their having to meet him in the hereafter vain will be their works nor shall we on the day of judgment give them any weight.
that is their reward hell because they rejected faith and took my signs and my messengers by way of jest.
as to those who believe and work righteous deeds they have for their entertainment the gardens of paradise
wherein they shall dwell for aye no change will they wish for from them.
say if the ocean were ink wherewith to write out the words of my lord sooner would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my lord even if we added another ocean like it for its aid.
say i am but a man like yourselves but the inspiration has come to me that your allah is one allah whoever expects to meet his lord let him work righteousness and in the worship of his lord admit no one as partner.
kaf. ha. ya. xbain. sad.
this is a recital of the mercy of thy lord to his servant zakariya.
behold he cried to his lord in secret
praying o my lord infirm indeed are my bones and the hair of my head doth glisten with grey but never am i unblest o my lord in my prayer to thee
now i fear what my relatives and colleagues will do after me but my wife is barren so give me an heir as from thyself
one that will truly represent me and represent the posterity of jacob and make him o my lord one with whom thou art wellpleased
his prayer was answered o zakariya we give thee good news of a son his name shall be yahya on none by that name have we conferred distinction before.
he said o my lord how shall i have a son when my wife is barren and i have grown quite decrepit from old age
he said so it will be thy lord saith xbthat is easy for me i did indeed create thee before when thou hadst been nothingxb
zakariya said o my lord give me a sign. thy sign was the answer shall be that thou shalt speak to no man for three nights although thou art not dumb.
so zakariya came out to his people from him chamber he told them by signs to celebrate allahxbs praises in the morning and in the evening.
to his son came the command o yahya take hold of the book with might and we gave him wisdom even as a youth
and piety for all creatures as from us and purity he was devout
and kind to his parents and he was not overbearing or rebellious.
so peace on him the day he was born the day that he dies and the day that he will be raised up to life again
relate in the book the story of mary when she withdrew from her family to a place in the east.
she placed a screen to screen herself from them then we sent her our angel and he appeared before her as a man in all respects.
she said i seek refuge from thee to allah most gracious come not near if thou dost fear allah.
he said nay i am only a messenger from thy lord to announce to thee the gift of a holy son.
she said how shall i have a son seeing that no man has touched me and i am not unchaste
he said so it will be thy lord saith xbthat is easy for me and we wish to appoint him as a sign unto men and a mercy from usxbit is a matter so decreed.
so she conceived him and she retired with him to a remote place.
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palmtree she cried in her anguish ah would that i had died before this would that i had been a thing forgotten and out of sight
but a voice cried to her from beneath the palmtree grieve not for thy lord hath provided a rivulet beneath thee
and shake towards thyself the trunk of the palmtree it will let fall fresh ripe dates upon thee.
so eat and drink and cool thine eye. and if thou dost see any man say xbi have vowed a fast to allah most gracious and this day will i enter into not talk with any human beingxb
at length she brought the babe to her people carrying him in her arms. they said o mary truly an amazing thing hast thou brought
o sister of aaron thy father was not a man of evil nor thy mother a woman unchaste
but she pointed to the babe. they said how can we talk to one who is a child in the cradle
he said i am indeed a servant of allah he hath given me revelation and made me a prophet
and he hath made me blessed wheresoever i be and hath enjoined on me prayer and charity as long as i live
he hath made me kind to my mother and not overbearing or miserable
so peace is on me the day i was born the day that i die and the day that i shall be raised up to life again
such was jesus the son of mary it is a statement of truth about which they vainly dispute.
it is not befitting to the majesty of allah that he should beget a son. glory be to him when he determines a matter he only says to it be and it is.
verily allah is my lord and your lord him therefore serve ye this is a way that is straight.
but the sects differ among themselves and woe to the unbelievers because of the coming judgment of a momentous day
how plainly will they see and hear the day that they will appear before us but the unjust today are in error manifest
but warn them of the day of distress when the matter will be determined for behold they are negligent and they do not believe
it is we who will inherit the earth and all beings thereon to us will they all be returned.
also mention in the book the story of abraham he was a man of truth a prophet.
behold he said to his father o my father why worship that which heareth not and seeth not and can profit thee nothing
o my father to me hath come knowledge which hath not reached thee so follow me i will guide thee to a way that is even and straight.
o my father serve not satan for satan is a rebel against allah most gracious.
o my father i fear lest a penalty afflict thee from allah most gracious so that thou become to satan a friend.
the father replied dost thou hate my gods o abraham if thou forbear not i will indeed stone thee now get away from me for a good long while
abraham said peace be on thee i will pray to my lord for thy forgiveness for he is to me most gracious.
and i will turn away from you all and from those whom ye invoke besides allah i will call on my lord perhaps by my prayer to my lord i shall be not unblest.
when he had turned away from them and from those whom they worshipped besides allah we bestowed on him isaac and jacob and each one of them we made a prophet.
and we bestowed of our mercy on them and we granted them lofty honour on the tongue of truth.
also mention in the book the story of moses for he was specially chosen and he was a messenger and a prophet.
and we called him from the right side of mount sinai and made him draw near to us for mystic converse.
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron also a prophet.
also mention in the book the story of ismaxbil he was strictly true to what he promised and he was a messenger and a prophet.
he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity and he was most acceptable in the sight of his lord.
also mention in the book the case of idris he was a man of truth and sincerity and a prophet
and we raised him to a lofty station.
those were some of the prophets on whom allah did bestow his gracename and of those who we carried in the ark with noah and of the posterity of abraham and israel of those whom we guided and chose. whenever the signs of allah most gracious were rehearsed to them they would fall down in prostrate adoration and in tears.
but after them there followed a posterity who missed prayers and followed after lusts soon then will they face destruction
except those who repent and believe and work righteousness for these will enter the garden and will not be wronged in the least
gardens of eternity those which allah most gracious has promised to his servants in the unseen for his promise must necessarily come to pass.
they will not there hear any vain discourse but only salutations of peace and they will have therein their sustenance morning and evening.
such is the garden which we give as an inheritance to those of our servants who guard against evil.
the angels say we descend not but by command of thy lord to him belongeth what is before us and what is behind us and what is between and thy lord never doth forget
lord of the heavens and of the earth and of all that is between them so worship him and be constant and patient in his worship knowest thou of any who is worthy of the same name as he
man says what when i am dead shall i then be raised up alive
but does not man call to mind that we created him before out of nothing
so by thy lord without doubt we shall gather them together and also the evil ones with them then shall we bring them forth on their knees round about hell
then shall we certainly drag out from every sect all those who were worst in obstinate rebellion against allah most gracious.
and certainly we know best those who are most worthy of being burned therein.
not one of you but will pass over it this is with thy lord a decree which must be accomplished.
but we shall save those who guarded against evil and we shall leave the wrongdoers therein humbled to their knees.
when our clear signs are rehearsed to them the unbelievers say to those who believe which of the two sides is best in point of position which makes the best show in council
but how many countless generations before them have we destroyed who were even better in equipment and in glitter to the eye
say if any men go astray allah most gracious extends the rope to them until when they see the warning of allah being fulfilled  either in punishment or in the approach of the hourname and who weakest in forces
and allah doth advance in guidance those who seek guidance and the things that endure good deeds are best in the sight of thy lord as rewards and best in respect of their eventual return.
hast thou then seen the sort of man who rejects our signs yet says i shall certainly be given wealth and children
has he penetrated to the unseen or has he taken a contract with allah most gracious
nay we shall record what he says and we shall add and add to his punishment.
to us shall return all that he talks of and he shall appear before us bare and alone.
and they have taken for worship gods other than allah to give them power and glory
instead they shall reject their worship and become adversaries against them.
seest thou not that we have set the evil ones on against the unbelievers to incite them with fury
so make no haste against them for we but count out to them a limited number of days.
the day we shall gather the righteous to allah most gracious like a band presented before a king for honours
and we shall drive the sinners to hell like thirsty cattle driven down to water
none shall have the power of intercession but such a one as has received permission or promise from allah most gracious.
they say allah most gracious has begotten a son
indeed ye have put forth a thing most monstrous
at it the skies are ready to burst the earth to split asunder and the mountains to fall down in utter ruin
that they should invoke a son for allah most gracious.
for it is not consonant with the majesty of allah most gracious that he should beget a son.
not one of the beings in the heavens and the earth but must come to allah most gracious as a servant.
he does take an account of them all and hath numbered them all exactly.
and everyone of them will come to him singly on the day of judgment.
on those who believe and work deeds of righteousness will allah most gracious bestow love.
so have we made the qurxban easy in thine own tongue that with it thou mayest give glad tidings to the righteous and warnings to people given to contention.
but how many countless generations before them have we destroyed canst thou find a single one of them now or hear so much as a whisper of them
taha.
we have not sent down the qurxban to thee to be an occasion for thy distress
but only as an admonition to those who fear allah
a revelation from him who created the earth and the heavens on high.
allah most gracious is firmly established on the throne of authority.
to him belongs what is in the heavens and on earth and all between them and all beneath the soil.
if thou pronounce the word aloud it is no matter for verily he knoweth what is secret and what is yet more hidden.
allah there is no god but he to him belong the most beautiful names.
has the story of moses reached thee
behold he saw a fire so he said to his family tarry ye i perceive a fire perhaps i can bring you some burning brand therefrom or find some guidance at the fire.
but when he came to the fire a voice was heard o moses
verily i am thy lord therefore in my presence put off thy shoes thou art in the sacred valley tuwa.
i have chosen thee listen then to the inspiration sent to thee.
verily i am allah there is no god but i so serve thou me only and establish regular prayer for celebrating my praise.
verily the hour is coming  my design is to keep it hidden  for every soul to receive its reward by the measure of its endeavour.
therefore let not such as believe not therein but follow their own lusts divert thee therefrom lest thou perish..
and what is that in the right hand o moses
he said it is my rod on it i lean with it i beat down fodder for my flocks and in it i find other uses.
allah said throw it o moses
he threw it and behold it was a snake active in motion.
allah said seize it and fear not we shall return it at once to its former condition..
now draw thy hand close to thy side it shall come forth white and shining without harm or stainname
in order that we may show thee two of our greater signs.
go thou to pharaoh for he has indeed transgressed all bounds.
moses said o my lord expand me my breast
ease my task for me
and remove the impediment from my speech
so they may understand what i say
and give me a minister from my family
aaron my brother
add to my strength through him
and make him share my task
that we may celebrate thy praise without stint
and remember thee without stint
for thou art he that ever regardeth us.
allah said granted is thy prayer o moses
and indeed we conferred a favour on thee another time before.
behold we sent to thy mother by inspiration the message
xbthrow the child into the chest and throw the chest into the river the river will cast him up on the bank and he will be taken up by one who is an enemy to me and an enemy to himxb but i cast the garment of love over thee from me and this in order that thou mayest be reared under mine eye.
behold thy sister goeth forth and saith xbshall i show you one who will nurse and rear the childxb so we brought thee back to thy mother that her eye might be cooled and she should not grieve. then thou didst slay a man but we saved thee from trouble and we tried thee in various ways. then didst thou tarry a number of years with the people of midian. then didst thou come hither as ordained o moses
and i have prepared thee for myself for service..
go thou and thy brother with my signs and slacken not either of you in keeping me in remembrance.
go both of you to pharaoh for he has indeed transgressed all bounds
but speak to him mildly perchance he may take warning or fear allah.
they moses and aaron said our lord we fear lest he hasten with insolence against us or lest he transgress all bounds.
he said fear not for i am with you i hear and see everything.
so go ye both to him and say xbverily we are messengers sent by thy lord send forth therefore the children of israel with us and afflict them not with a sign indeed have we come from thy lord and peace to all who follow guidance
xbverily it has been revealed to us that the penalty awaits those who reject and turn away.xb
when this message was delivered pharaoh said who then o moses is the lord of you two
he said our lord is he who gave to each created thing its form and nature and further gave it guidance.
pharaoh said what then is the condition of previous generations
he replied the knowledge of that is with my lord duly recorded my lord never errs nor forgets
he who has made for you the earth like a carpet spread out has enabled you to go about therein by roads and channels and has sent down water from the sky. with it have we produced diverse pairs of plants each separate from the others.
eat for yourselves and pasture your cattle verily in this are signs for men endued with understanding.
from the earth did we create you and into it shall we return you and from it shall we bring you out once again.
and we showed pharaoh all our signs but he did reject and refuse.
he said hast thou come to drive us out of our land with thy magic o moses
but we can surely produce magic to match thine so make a tryst between us and thee which we shall not fail to keep  neither we nor thou  in a place where both shall have even chances.
moses said your tryst is the day of the festival and let the people be assembled when the sun is well up.
so pharaoh withdrew he concerted his plan and then came back.
moses said to him woe to you forge not ye a lie against allah lest he destroy you at once utterly by chastisement the forger must suffer frustration
so they disputed one with another over their affair but they kept their talk secret.
they said these two are certainly expert magicians their object is to drive you out from your land with their magic and to do away with your most cherished institutions.
therefore concert your plan and then assemble in serried ranks he wins all along today who gains the upper hand.
they said o moses whether wilt thou that thou throw first or that we be the first to throw
he said nay throw ye first then behold their ropes and their rodsso it seemed to him on account of their magic  began to be in lively motion
so moses conceived in his mind a sort of fear.
we said fear not for thou hast indeed the upper hand
throw that which is in thy right hand quickly will it swallow up that which they have faked what they have faked is but a magicianxbs trick and the magician thrives not no matter where he goes.
so the magicians were thrown down to prostration they said we believe in the lord of aaron and moses.
pharaoh said believe ye in him before i give you permission surely this must be your leader who has taught you magic be sure i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides and i will have you crucified on trunks of palmtrees so shall ye know for certain which of us can give the more severe and the more lasting punishment
they said never shall we regard thee as more than the clear signs that have come to us or than him who created us so decree whatever thou desirest to decree for thou canst only decree touching the life of this world.
for us we have believed in our lord may he forgive us our faults and the magic to which thou didst compel us for allah is best and most abiding.
verily he who comes to his lord as a sinner at judgmentname
but such as come to him as believers who have worked righteous deedsname
gardens of eternity beneath which flow rivers they will dwell therein for aye such is the reward of those who purify themselves from evil.
we sent an inspiration to moses travel by night with my servants and strike a dry path for them through the sea without fear of being overtaken by pharaoh and without any other fear.
then pharaoh pursued them with his forces but the waters completely overwhelmed them and covered them up.
pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright.
o ye children of israel we delivered you from your enemy and we made a covenant with you on the right side of mount sinai and we sent down to you manna and quails
saying eat of the good things we have provided for your sustenance but commit no excess therein lest my wrath should justly descend on you and those on whom descends my wrath do perish indeed
but without doubt i am also he that forgives again and again to those who repent believe and do right whoname are ready to receive true guidance.
when moses was up on the mount allah said what made thee hasten in advance of thy people o moses
he replied behold they are close on my footsteps i hastened to thee o my lord to please thee.
allah said we have tested thy people in thy absence the samiri has led them astray.
so moses returned to his people in a state of indignation and sorrow. he said o my people did not your lord make a handsome promise to you did then the promise seem to you long in coming or did ye desire that wrath should descend from your lord on you and so ye broke your promise to me
they said we broke not the promise to thee as far as lay in our power but we were made to carry the weight of the ornaments of the whole people and we threw them into the fire and that was what the samiri suggested.
then he brought out of the fire before the people the image of a calf it seemed to low so they said this is your god and the god of moses but moses has forgotten
could they not see that it could not return them a word for answer and that it had no power either to harm them or to do them good
aaron had already before this said to them o my people ye are being tested in this for verily your lord is allah most gracious so follow me and obey my command.
they had said we will not abandon this cult but we will devote ourselves to it until moses returns to us.
moses said o aaron what kept thee back when thou sawest them going wrong
from following me didst thou then disobey my order
aaron replied o son of my mother seize me not by my beard nor by the hair of my head truly i feared lest thou shouldst say xbthou has caused a division among the children of israel and thou didst not respect my wordxb
moses said what then is thy case o samiri
he replied i saw what they saw not so i took a handful of dust from the footprint of the messenger and threw it into the calf thus did my soul suggest to me.
moses said get thee gone but thy punishment in this life will be that thou wilt say xbtouch me notxb and moreover for a future penalty thou hast a promise that will not fail now look at thy god of whom thou hast become a devoted worshipper we will certainly melt it in a blazing fire and scatter it broadcast in the sea
but the god of you all is the one allah there is no god but he all things he comprehends in his knowledge.
thus do we relate to thee some stories of what happened before for we have sent thee a message from our own presence.
if any do turn away therefrom verily they will bear a burden on the day of judgment
they will abide in this state and grievous will the burden be to them on that day
the day when the trumpet will be sounded that day we shall gather the sinful bleareyed with terror.
in whispers will they consult each other yet tarried not longer than ten days
we know best what they will say when their leader most eminent in conduct will say ye tarried not longer than a day
they ask thee concerning the mountains say my lord will uproot them and scatter them as dust
he will leave them as plains smooth and level
nothing crooked or curved wilt thou see in their place.
on that day will they follow the caller straight no crookedness can they show him all sounds shall humble themselves in the presence of allah most gracious nothing shalt thou hear but the tramp of their feet as they march.
on that day shall no intercession avail except for those for whom permission has been granted by allah most gracious and whose word is acceptable to him.
he knows what appears to his creatures as before or after or behind them but they shall not compass it with their knowledge.
all faces shall be humbled before him  the living the selfsubsisting eternal hopeless indeed will be the man that carries iniquity on his back.
but he who works deeds of righteousness and has faith will have no fear of harm nor of any curtailment of what is his due.
thus have we sent this down  an arabic qurxban  and explained therein in detail some of the warnings in order that they may fear allah or that it may cause their remembrance of him.
high above all is allah the king the truth be not in haste with the qurxban before its revelation to thee is completed but say o my lord advance me in knowledge.
we had already beforehand taken the covenant of adam but he forgot and we found on his part no firm resolve.
when we said to the angels prostrate yourselves to adam they prostrated themselves but not iblis he refused.
then we said o adam verily this is an enemy to thee and thy wife so let him not get you both out of the garden so that thou art landed in misery.
there is therein enough provision for thee not to go hungry nor to go naked
nor to suffer from thirst nor from the sunxbs heat.
but satan whispered evil to him he said o adam shall i lead thee to the tree of eternity and to a kingdom that never decays
in the result they both ate of the tree and so their nakedness appeared to them they began to sew together for their covering leaves from the garden thus did adam disobey his lord and allow himself to be seduced.
but his lord chose him for his grace he turned to him and gave him guidance.
he said get ye down both of youname from the garden with enmity one to another but if as is sure there comes to you guidance from me whosoever follows my guidance will not lose his way nor fall into misery.
but whosoever turns away from my message verily for him is a life narrowed down and we shall raise him up blind on the day of judgment.
he will say o my lord why hast thou raised me up blind while i had sight before
allah will say thus didst thou when our signs came unto thee disregard them so wilt thou this day be disregarded.
and thus do we recompense him who transgresses beyond bounds and believes not in the signs of his lord and the penalty of the hereafter is far more grievous and more enduring.
is it not a warning to such men to call to mind how many generations before them we destroyed in whose haunts they now move verily in this are signs for men endued with understanding.
had it not been for a word that went forth before from thy lord their punishment must necessarily have come but there is a term appointed for respite.
therefore be patient with what they say and celebrate constantly the praises of thy lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting yea celebrate them for part of the hours of the night and at the sides of the day that thou mayest have spiritual joy.
nor strain thine eyes in longing for the things we have given for enjoyment to parties of them the splendour of the life of this world through which we test them but the provision of thy lord is better and more enduring.
enjoin prayer on thy people and be constant therein. we ask thee not to provide sustenance we provide it for thee. but the fruit of the hereafter is for righteousness.
they say why does he not bring us a sign from his lord has not a clear sign come to them of all that was in the former books of revelation
and if we had inflicted on them a penalty before this they would have said our lord if only thou hadst sent us a messenger we should certainly have followed thy signs before we were humbled and put to shame.
say each one of us is waiting wait ye therefore and soon shall ye know who it is that is on the straight and even way and who it is that has received guidance.
closer and closer to mankind comes their reckoning yet they heed not and they turn away.
never comes aught to them of a renewed message from their lord but they listen to it as in jest
their hearts toying as with trifles. the wrongdoers conceal their private counsels saying is this one more than a man like yourselves will ye go to witchcraft with your eyes open
say my lord knoweth every word spoken in the heavens and on earth he is the one that heareth and knoweth all things.
nay they say these are medleys of dream  nay he forged it  nay he is but a poet let him then bring us a sign like the ones that were sent to prophets of old
as to those before them not one of the populations which we destroyed believed will these believe
before thee also the messengers we sent were but men to whom we granted inspiration if ye realise this not ask of those who possess the message.
nor did we give them bodies that ate no food nor were they exempt from death.
in the end we fulfilled to them our promise and we saved them and those whom we pleased but we destroyed those who transgressed beyond bounds.
we have revealed for you o men a book in which is a message for you will ye not then understand
how many were the populations we utterly destroyed because of their iniquities setting up in their places other peoples
yet when they felt our punishment coming behold they tried to flee from it.
flee not but return to the good things of this life which were given you and to your homes in order that ye may be called to account.
they said ah woe to us we were indeed wrongdoers
and that cry of theirs ceased not till we made them as a field that is mown as ashes silent and quenched.
not for idle sport did we create the heavens and the earth and all that is between
if it had been our wish to take just a pastime we should surely have taken it from the things nearest to us if we would do such a thing
nay we hurl the truth against falsehood and it knocks out its brain and behold falsehood doth perish ah woe be to you for the false things ye ascribe to us.
to him belong all creatures in the heavens and on earth even those who are in his very presence are not too proud to serve him nor are they ever weary of his service
they celebrate his praises night and day nor do they ever flag or intermit.
or have they taken for worship gods from the earth who can raise the dead
if there were in the heavens and the earth other gods besides allah there would have been confusion in both but glory to allah the lord of the throne high is he above what they attribute to him
he cannot be questioned for his acts but they will be questioned for theirs.
or have they taken for worship other gods besides him say bring your convincing proof this is the message of those with me and the message of those before me. but most of them know not the truth and so turn away.
not a messenger did we send before thee without this inspiration sent by us to him that there is no god but i therefore worship and serve me.
and they say allah most gracious has begotten offspring. glory to him they are but servants raised to honour.
they speak not before he speaks and they act in all things by his command.
he knows what is before them and what is behind them and they offer no intercession except for those who are acceptable and they stand in awe and reverence of his glory.
if any of them should say i am a god besides him such a one we should reward with hell thus do we reward those who do wrong.
do not the unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were joined together as one unit of creation before we clove them asunder we made from water every living thing. will they not then believe
and we have set on the earth mountains standing firm lest it should shake with them and we have made therein broad highways between mountains for them to pass through that they may receive guidance.
and we have made the heavens as a canopy well guarded yet do they turn away from the signs which these things point to
it is he who created the night and the day and the sun and the moon all the celestial bodies swim along each in its rounded course.
we granted not to any man before thee permanent life here if then thou shouldst die would they live permanently
every soul shall have a taste of death and we test you by evil and by good by way of trial. to us must ye return.
when the unbelievers see thee they treat thee not except with ridicule. is this they say the one who talks of your gods and they blaspheme at the mention of allah most gracious
man is a creature of haste soon enough will i show you my signs then ye will not ask me to hasten them
they say when will this promise come to pass if ye are telling the truth
if only the unbelievers knew the time when they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor yet from their backs and when no help can reach them
nay it may come to them all of a sudden and confound them no power will they have then to avert it nor will they then get respite.
mocked were many messenger before thee but their scoffers were hemmed in by the thing that they mocked.
say who can keep you safe by night and by day from the wrath of allah most gracious yet they turn away from the mention of their lord.
or have they gods that can guard them from us they have no power to aid themselves nor can they be defended from us.
nay we gave the good things of this life to these men and their fathers until the period grew long for them see they not that we gradually reduce the land in their control from its outlying borders is it then they who will win
say i do but warn you according to revelation but the deaf will not hear the call even when they are warned
if but a breath of the wrath of thy lord do touch them they will then say woe to us we did wrong indeed
we shall set up scales of justice for the day of judgment so that not a soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least and if there be no more than the weight of a mustard seed we will bring it to account and enough are we to take account.
in the past we granted to moses and aaron the criterion for judgment and a light and a message for those who would do right
those who fear their lord in their most secret thoughts and who hold the hour of judgment in awe.
and this is a blessed message which we have sent down will ye then reject it
we bestowed aforetime on abraham his rectitude of conduct and well were we acquainted with him.
behold he said to his father and his people what are these images to which ye are so assiduously devoted
they said we found our fathers worshipping them.
he said indeed ye have been in manifest error  ye and your fathers.
they said have you brought us the truth or are you one of those who jest
he said nay your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth he who created them from nothing and i am a witness to this truth.
and by allah i have a plan for your idols  after ye go away and turn your backs..
so he broke them to pieces all but the biggest of them that they might turn and address themselves to it.
they said who has done this to our gods he must indeed be some man of impiety
they said we heard a youth talk of them he is called abraham.
they said then bring him before the eyes of the people that they may bear witness.
they said art thou the one that did this with our gods o abraham
he said nay this was done by  this is their biggest one ask them if they can speak intelligently
so they turned to themselves and said surely ye are the ones in the wrong
then were they confounded with shame they said thou knowest full well that these idols do not speak
abraham said do ye then worship besides allah things that can neither be of any good to you nor do you harm
fie upon you and upon the things that ye worship besides allah have ye no sense..
they said burn him and protect your gods if ye do anything at all
we said o fire be thou cool and a means of safety for abraham
then they sought a stratagem against him but we made them the ones that lost most
but we delivered him and his nephew lut and directed them to the land which we have blessed for the nations.
and we bestowed on him isaac and as an additional gift a grandson jacob and we made righteous men of every one of them.
and we made them leaders guiding men by our command and we sent them inspiration to do good deeds to establish regular prayers and to practise regular charity and they constantly served us and us only.
and to lut too we gave judgment and knowledge and we saved him from the town which practised abominations truly they were a people given to evil a rebellious people.
and we admitted him to our mercy for he was one of the righteous.
remember noah when he cried to us aforetime we listened to his prayer and delivered him and his family from great distress.
we helped him against people who rejected our signs truly they were a people given to evil so we drowned them in the flood all together.
and remember david and solomon when they gave judgment in the matter of the field into which the sheep of certain people had strayed by night we did witness their judgment.
to solomon we inspired the right understanding of the matter to each of them we gave judgment and knowledge it was our power that made the hills and the birds celebrate our praises with david it was we who did all these things.
it was we who taught him the making of coats of mail for your benefit to guard you from each otherxbs violence will ye then be grateful
it was our power that made the violent unruly wind flow tamely for solomon to his order to the land which we had blessed for we do know all things.
and of the evil ones were some who dived for him and did other work besides and it was we who guarded them.
and remember job when he cried to his lord truly distress has seized me but thou art the most merciful of those that are merciful.
so we listened to him we removed the distress that was on him and we restored his people to him and doubled their numbername and a thing for commemoration for all who serve us.
and remember ismaxbil idris and zulkifl all men of constancy and patience
we admitted them to our mercy for they were of the righteous ones.
and remember zunnun when he departed in wrath he imagined that we had no power over him but he cried through the depths of darkness there is no god but thou glory to thee i was indeed wrong
so we listened to him and delivered him from distress and thus do we deliver those who have faith.
and remember zakariya when he cried to his lord o my lord leave me not without offspring though thou art the best of inheritors.
so we listened to him and we granted him yahya we cured his wifexbs barrenness for him. these three were ever quick in emulation in good works they used to call on us with love and reverence and humble themselves before us.
and remember her who guarded her chastity we breathed into her of our spirit and we made her and her son a sign for all peoples.
verily this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood and i am your lord and cherisher therefore serve me and no other.
but later generations cut off their affair of unity one from another yet will they all return to us.
whoever works any act of righteousness and has faithname
but there is a ban on any population which we have destroyed that they shall not return
until the gog and magog people are let through their barrier and they swiftly swarm from every hill.
then will the true promise draw nigh of fulfilment then behold the eyes of the unbelievers will fixedly stare in horror ah woe to us we were indeed heedless of this nay we truly did wrong
verily ye unbelievers and the false gods that ye worship besides allah are but fuel for hell to it will ye surely come
if these had been gods they would not have got there but each one will abide therein.
there sobbing will be their lot nor will they there hear aught else.
those for whom the good record from us has gone before will be removed far therefrom.
not the slightest sound will they hear of hell what their souls desired in that will they dwell.
the great terror will bring them no grief but the angels will meet them with mutual greetings this is your day the day that ye were promised.
the day that we roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books completedname so shall we produce a new one a promise we have undertaken truly shall we fulfil it.
before this we wrote in the psalms after the message given to moses my servants the righteous shall inherit the earth.
verily in this qurxban is a message for people who would truly worship allah.
we sent thee not but as a mercy for all creatures.
say what has come to me by inspiration is that your allah is one allah will ye therefore bow to his will in islam
but if they turn back say i have proclaimed the message to you all alike and in truth but i know not whether that which ye are promised is near or far.
it is he who knows what is open in speech and what ye hide in your hearts.
i know not but that it may be a trial for you and a grant of worldly livelihood to you for a time.
say o my lord judge thou in truth our lord most gracious is the one whose assistance should be sought against the blasphemies ye utter
o mankind fear your lord for the convulsion of the hour of judgment will be a thing terrible
the day ye shall see it every mother giving suck shall forget her sucklingbabe and every pregnant female shall drop her load unformed thou shalt see mankind as in a drunken riot yet not drunk but dreadful will be the wrath of allah.
and yet among men there are such as dispute about allah without knowledge and follow every evil one obstinate in rebellion
about the evil one it is decreed that whoever turns to him for friendship him will he lead astray and he will guide him to the penalty of the fire.
o mankind if ye have a doubt about the resurrection consider that we created you out of dust then out of sperm then out of a leechlike clot then out of a morsel of flesh partly formed and partly unformed in order that we may manifest our power to you and we cause whom we will to rest in the wombs for an appointed term then do we bring you out as babes then foster you that ye may reach your age of full strength and some of you are called to die and some are sent back to the feeblest old age so that they know nothing after having known much and further thou seest the earth barren and lifeless but when we pour down rain on it it is stirred to life it swells and it puts forth every kind of beautiful growth in pairs.
this is so because allah is the reality it is he who gives life to the dead and it is he who has power over all things.
and verily the hour will come there can be no doubt about it or about the fact that allah will raise up all who are in the graves.
yet there is among men such a one as disputes about allah without knowledge without guidance and without a book of enlightenment
disdainfully bending his side in order to lead men astray from the path of allah for him there is disgrace in this life and on the day of judgment we shall make him taste the penalty of burning fire.
it will be said this is because of the deeds which thy hands sent forth for verily allah is not unjust to his servants.
there are among men some who serve allah as it were on the verge if good befalls them they are therewith well content but if a trial comes to them they turn on their faces they lose both this world and the hereafter that is loss for all to see
they call on such deities besides allah as can neither hurt nor profit them that is straying far indeed from the way
perhaps they call on one whose hurt is nearer than his profit evil indeed is the patron and evil the companion or help
verily allah will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow for allah carries out all that he plans.
if any think that allah will not help him his messenger in this world and the hereafter let him stretch out a rope to the ceiling and cut himself off then let him see whether his plan will remove that which enrages him
thus have we sent down clear signs and verily allah doth guide whom he will
those who believe in the qurxban those who follow the jewish scriptures and the sabians christians magians and polytheistsname
seest thou not that to allah bow down in worship all things that are in the heavens and on earthname the moon the stars the hills the trees the animals and a great number among mankind but a great number are also such as are fit for punishment and such as allah shall disgracename
these two antagonists dispute with each other about their lord but those who deny their lordname
with it will be scalded what is within their bodies as well as their skins.
in addition there will be maces of iron to punish them.
every time they wish to get away therefrom from anguish they will be forced back therein and it will be said taste ye the penalty of burning
allah will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow they shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls and their garments there will be of silk.
for they have been guided in this life to the purest of speeches they have been guided to the path of him who is worthy of all praise.
as to those who have rejected allah and would keep back men from the way of allah and from the sacred mosque which we have made open to all men  equal is the dweller there and the visitor from the country  and any whose purpose therein is profanity or wrongdoing  them will we cause to taste of a most grievous penalty.
behold we gave the site to abraham of the sacred house saying associate not anything in worship with me and sanctify my house for those who compass it round or stand up or bow or prostrate themselves therein in prayer.
and proclaim the pilgrimage among men they will come to thee on foot and mounted on every kind of camel lean on account of journeys through deep and distant mountain highways
that they may witness the benefits provided for them and celebrate the name of allah through the days appointed over the cattle which he has provided for them for sacrifice then eat ye thereof and feed the distressed ones in want.
then let them complete the rites prescribed for them perform their vows and again circumambulate the ancient house.
such is the pilgrimage whoever honours the sacred rites of allah for him it is good in the sight of his lord. lawful to you for food in pilgrimage are cattle except those mentioned to you as exception but shun the abomination of idols and shun the word that is false
being true in faith to allah and never assigning partners to him if anyone assigns partners to allah is as if he had fallen from heaven and been snatched up by birds or the wind had swooped like a bird on its prey and thrown him into a fardistant place.
such is his state and whoever holds in honour the symbols of allah in the sacrifice of animals such honour should come truly from piety of heart.
in them ye have benefits for a term appointed in the end their place of sacrifice is near the ancient house.
to every people did we appoint rites of sacrifice that they might celebrate the name of allah over the sustenance he gave them from animals fit for food. but your god is one god submit then your wills to him in islam and give thou the good news to those who humble themselves
to those whose hearts when allah is mentioned are filled with fear who show patient perseverance over their afflictions keep up regular prayer and spend in charity out of what we have bestowed upon them.
the sacrificial camels we have made for you as among the symbols from allah in them is much good for you then pronounce the name of allah over them as they line up for sacrifice when they are down on their sides after slaughter eat ye thereof and feed such as beg not but live in contentment and such as beg with due humility thus have we made animals subject to you that ye may be grateful.
it is not their meat nor their blood that reaches allah it is your piety that reaches him he has thus made them subject to you that ye may glorify allah for his guidance to you and proclaim the good news to all who do right.
verily allah will defend from ill those who believe verily allah loveth not any that is a traitor to faith or show ingratitude.
to those against whom war is made permission is given to fight because they are wronged and verily allah is most powerful for their aid
they are those who have been expelled from their homes in defiance of rightname our lord is allah. did not allah check one set of people by means of another there would surely have been pulled down monasteries churches synagogues and mosques in which the name of allah is commemorated in abundant measure. allah will certainly aid those who aid his cause for verily allah is full of strength exalted in might able to enforce his will.
they are those who if we establish them in the land establish regular prayer and give regular charity enjoin the right and forbid wrong with allah rests the end and decision of all affairs.
if they treat thy mission as false so did the peoples before them with their prophetsname and xbad and thamud
those of abraham and lut
and the companions of the madyan people and moses was rejected in the same way. but i granted respite to the unbelievers and only after that did i punish them but how terrible was my rejection of them
how many populations have we destroyed which were given to wrongdoing they tumbled down on their roofs. and how many wells are lying idle and neglected and castles lofty and wellbuilt
do they not travel through the land so that their hearts and minds may thus learn wisdom and their ears may thus learn to hear truly it is not their eyes that are blind but their hearts which are in their breasts.
yet they ask thee to hasten on the punishment but allah will not fail in his promise. verily a day in the sight of thy lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning.
and to how many populations did i give respite which were given to wrongdoing in the end i punished them. to me is the destination of all.
say o men i am sent to you only to give a clear warning
those who believe and work righteousness for them is forgiveness and a sustenance most generous.
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them they will be companions of the fire.
never did we send a messenger or a prophet before thee but when he framed a desire satan threw some vanity into his desire but allah will cancel anything vain that satan throws in and allah will confirm and establish his signs for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom
that he may make the suggestions thrown in by satan but a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and who are hardened of heart verily the wrongdoers are in a schism far from the truth
and that those on whom knowledge has been bestowed may learn that the qurxban is the truth from thy lord and that they may believe therein and their hearts may be made humbly open to it for verily allah is the guide of those who believe to the straight way.
those who reject faith will not cease to be in doubt concerning revelation until the hour of judgment comes suddenly upon them or there comes to them the penalty of a day of disaster.
on that day of dominion will be that of allah he will judge between them so those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in gardens of delight.
and for those who reject faith and deny our signs there will be a humiliating punishment.
those who leave their homes in the cause of allah and are then slain or diename
verily he will admit them to a place with which they shall be well pleased for allah is allknowing most forbearing.
that is so. and if one has retaliated to no greater extent than the injury he received and is again set upon inordinately allah will help him for allah is one that blots out sins and forgives again and again.
that is because allah merges night into day and he merges day into night and verily it is allah who hears and sees all things.
that is because allah  he is the reality and those besides him whom they invokename most high most great.
seest thou not that allah sends down rain from the sky and forthwith the earth becomes clothed with green for allah is he who understands the finest mysteries and is wellacquainted with them.
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth for verily allahname worthy of all praise.
seest thou not that allah has made subject to you men all that is on the earth and the ships that sail through the sea by his command he withholds the sky rain from failing on the earth except by his leave for allah is most kind and most merciful to man.
it is he who gave you life will cause you to die and will again give you life truly man is a most ungrateful creature
to every people have we appointed rites and ceremonies which they must follow let them not then dispute with thee on the matter but do thou invite them to thy lord for thou art assuredly on the right way.
if they do wrangle with thee say allah knows best what it is ye are doing.
allah will judge between you on the day of judgment concerning the matters in which ye differ.
knowest thou not that allah knows all that is in heaven and on earth indeed it is all in a record and that is easy for allah.
yet they worship besides allah things for which no authority has been sent down to them and of which they have really no knowledge for those that do wrong there is no helper.
when our clear signs are rehearsed to them thou wilt notice a denial on the faces of the unbelievers they nearly attack with violence those who rehearse our signs to them. say shall i tell you of something far worse than these signs it is the fire of hell allah has promised it to the unbelievers and evil is that destination
o men here is a parable set forth listen to it those on whom besides allah ye call cannot create even a fly if they all met together for the purpose and if the fly should snatch away anything from them they would have no power to release it from the fly. feeble are those who petition and those whom they petition
no just estimate have they made of allah for allah is he who is strong and able to carry out his will.
allah chooses messengers from angels and from men for allah is he who hears and sees all things.
he knows what is before them and what is behind them and to allah go back all questions for decision.
o ye who believe bow down prostrate yourselves and adore your lord and do good that ye may prosper.
and strive in his cause as ye ought to strive with sincerity and under discipline. he has chosen you and has imposed no difficulties on you in religion it is the cult of your father abraham. it is he who has named you muslims both before and in this revelation that the messenger may be a witness for you and ye be witnesses for mankind so establish regular prayer give regular charity and hold fast to allah he is your protector  the best to protect and the best to help
the believers must eventually win through
those who humble themselves in their prayers
who avoid vain talk
who are active in deeds of charity
who abstain from sex
except with those joined to them in the marriage bond or the captives whom their right hands possessname
but those whose desires exceed those limits are transgressors
those who faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants
and who strictly guard their prayers
these will be the heirs
who will inherit paradise they will dwell therein for ever.
man we did create from a quintessence of clay
then we placed him as a drop of sperm in a place of rest firmly fixed
then we made the sperm into a clot of congealed blood then of that clot we made a foetus lump then we made out of that lump bones and clothed the bones with flesh then we developed out of it another creature. so blessed be allah the best to create
after that at length ye will die
again on the day of judgment will ye be raised up.
and we have made above you seven tracts and we are never unmindful of our creation.
and we send down water from the sky according to due measure and we cause it to soak in the soil and we certainly are able to drain it off with ease.
with it we grow for you gardens of datepalms and vines in them have ye abundant fruits and of them ye eat and have enjoyment
also a tree springing out of mount sinai which produces oil and relish for those who use it for food.
and in cattle too ye have an instructive example from within their bodies we produce milk for you to drink there are in them besides numerous other benefits for you and of their meat ye eat
and on them as well as in ships ye ride.
further we sent a long line of prophets for your instruction. we sent noah to his people he said o my people worship allah ye have no other god but him. will ye not fear him
the chiefs of the unbelievers among his people said he is no more than a man like yourselves his wish is to assert his superiority over you if allah had wished to send messengers he could have sent down angels never did we hear such a thing as he says among our ancestors of old.
and some said he is only a man possessed wait and have patience with him for a time.
noah said o my lord help me for that they accuse me of falsehood
so we inspired him with this message construct the ark within our sight and under our guidance then when comes our command and the fountains of the earth gush forth take thou on board pairs of every species male and female and thy family except those of them against whom the word has already gone forth and address me not in favour of the wrongdoers for they shall be drowned in the flood.
and when thou hast embarked on the ark  thou and those with thee say praise be to allah who has saved us from the people who do wrong.
and say o my lord enable me to disembark with thy blessing for thou art the best to enable us to disembark.
verily in this there are signs for men to understand thus do we try men.
then we raised after them another generation.
and we sent to them a messenger from among themselves saying worship allah ye have no other god but him. will ye not fear him
and the chiefs of his people who disbelieved and denied the meeting in the hereafter and on whom we had bestowed the good things of this life said he is no more than a man like yourselves he eats of that of which ye eat and drinks of what ye drink.
if ye obey a man like yourselves behold it is certain ye will be lost.
does he promise that when ye die and become dust and bones ye shall be brought forth again
far very far is that which ye are promised
there is nothing but our life in this world we shall die and we live but we shall never be raised up again
he is only a man who invents a lie against allah but we are not the ones to believe in him
the prophet said o my lord help me for that they accuse me of falsehood.
allah said in but a little while they are sure to be sorry
then the blast overtook them with justice and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves floating on the stream of time so away with the people who do wrong
then we raised after them other generations.
no people can hasten their term nor can they delay it.
then sent we our messengers in succession every time there came to a people their messenger they accused him of falsehood so we made them follow each other in punishment we made them as a tale that is told so away with a people that will not believe
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and authority manifest
to pharaoh and his chiefs but these behaved insolently they were an arrogant people.
they said shall we believe in two men like ourselves and their people are subject to us
so they accused them of falsehood and they became of those who were destroyed.
and we gave moses the book in order that they might receive guidance.
and we made the son of mary and his mother as a sign we gave them both shelter on high ground affording rest and security and furnished with springs.
o ye messengers enjoy all things good and pure and work righteousness for i am wellacquainted with all that ye do.
and verily this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood and i am your lord and cherisher therefore fear me and no other.
but people have cut off their affair of unity between them into sects each party rejoices in that which is with itself.
but leave them in their confused ignorance for a time.
do they think that because we have granted them abundance of wealth and sons
we would hasten them on in every good nay they do not understand.
verily those who live in awe for fear of their lord
those who believe in the signs of their lord
those who join not in worship partners with their lord
and those who dispense their charity with their hearts full of fear because they will return to their lord
it is these who hasten in every good work and these who are foremost in them.
on no soul do we place a burden greater than it can bear before us is a record which clearly shows the truth they will never be wronged.
but their hearts are in confused ignorance of this and there are besides that deeds of theirs which they will continue to do
until when we seize in punishment those of them who received the good things of this world behold they will groan in supplication
it will be said groan not in supplication this day for ye shall certainly not be helped by us.
my signs used to be rehearsed to you but ye used to turn back on your heels
in arrogance talking nonsense about the qurxban like one telling fables by night.
do they not ponder over the word of allah or has anything new come to them that did not come to their fathers of old
or do they not recognise their messenger that they deny him
or do they say he is possessed nay he has brought them the truth but most of them hate the truth.
if the truth had been in accord with their desires truly the heavens and the earth and all beings therein would have been in confusion and corruption nay we have sent them their admonition but they turn away from their admonition.
or is it that thou askest them for some recompense but the recompense of thy lord is best he is the best of those who give sustenance.
but verily thou callest them to the straight way
and verily those who believe not in the hereafter are deviating from that way.
if we had mercy on them and removed the distress which is on them they would obstinately persist in their transgression wandering in distraction to and fro.
we inflicted punishment on them but they humbled not themselves to their lord nor do they submissively entreat him
until we open on them a gate leading to a severe punishment then lo they will be plunged in despair therein
it is he who has created for you the faculties of hearing sight feeling and understanding little thanks it is ye give
and he has multiplied you through the earth and to him shall ye be gathered back.
it is he who gives life and death and to him is due the alternation of night and day will ye not then understand
on the contrary they say things similar to what the ancients said.
they say what when we die and become dust and bones could we really be raised up again
such things have been promised to us and to our fathers before they are nothing but tales of the ancients
say to whom belong the earth and all beings therein say if ye know
they will say to allah say yet will ye not receive admonition
say who is the lord of the seven heavens and the lord of the throne of glory supreme
they will say they belong to allah. say will ye not then be filled with awe
say who is it in whose hands is the governance of all thingsname but is not protected of any say if ye know.
they will say it belongs to allah. say then how are ye deluded
we have sent them the truth but they indeed practise falsehood
no son did allah beget nor is there any god along with him if there were many gods behold each god would have taken away what he had created and some would have lorded it over others glory to allah he is free from the sort of things they attribute to him
he knows what is hidden and what is open too high is he for the partners they attribute to him
say o my lord if thou wilt show me in my lifetime that which they are warned against
then o my lord put me not amongst the people who do wrong
and we are certainly able to show thee in fulfilment that against which they are warned.
repel evil with that which is best we are well acquainted with the things they say.
and say o my lord i seek refuge with thee from the suggestions of the evil ones.
and i seek refuge with thee o my lord lest they should come near me.
in falsehood will they be until when death comes to one of them he says o my lord send me back to life
in order that i may work righteousness in the things i neglected.  by no means it is but a word he says. before them is a partition till the day they are raised up.
then when the trumpet is blown there will be no more relationships between them that day nor will one ask after another
then those whose balance of good deeds is heavy they will attain salvation
but those whose balance is light will be those who have lost their souls in hell will they abide.
the fire will burn their faces and they will therein grin with their lips displaced.
were not my signs rehearsed to you and ye did but treat them as falsehood
they will say our lord our misfortune overwhelmed us and we became a people astray
our lord bring us out of this if ever we return to evil then shall we be wrongdoers indeed
he will say be ye driven into it with ignominy and speak ye not to me
a part of my servants there was who used to pray xbour lord we believe then do thou forgive us and have mercy upon us for thou art the best of those who show mercy
but ye treated them with ridicule so much so that ridicule of them made you forget my message while ye were laughing at them
i have rewarded them this day for their patience and constancy they are indeed the ones that have achieved bliss...
he will say what number of years did ye stay on earth
they will say we stayed a day or part of a day but ask those who keep account.
he will say ye stayed not but a little if ye had only known
did ye then think that we had created you in jest and that ye would not be brought back to us for account
therefore exalted be allah the king the reality there is no god but he the lord of the throne of honour
if anyone invokes besides allah any other god he has no authority therefor and his reckoning will be only with his lord and verily the unbelievers will fail to win through
so say o my lord grant thou forgiveness and mercy for thou art the best of those who show mercy
a sura which we have sent down and which we have ordained in it have we sent down clear signs in order that ye may receive admonition.
the woman and the man guilty of adultery or fornicationname in a matter prescribed by allah if ye believe in allah and the last day and let a party of the believers witness their punishment.
let no man guilty of adultery or fornication marry and but a woman similarly guilty or an unbeliever nor let any but such a man or an unbeliever marry such a woman to the believers such a thing is forbidden.
and those who launch a charge against chaste women and produce not four witnesses to support their allegations flog them with eighty stripes and reject their evidence ever after for such men are wicked transgressors
unless they repent thereafter and mend their conduct for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
and for those who launch a charge against their spouses and have in support no evidence but their own their solitary evidence can be received if they bear witness four times with an oath by allah that they are solemnly telling the truth
and the fifth oath should be that they solemnly invoke the curse of allah on themselves if they tell a lie.
but it would avert the punishment from the wife if she bears witness four times with an oath by allah that her husband is telling a lie
and the fifth oath should be that she solemnly invokes the wrath of allah on herself if her accuser is telling the truth.
if it were not for allahxbs grace and mercy on you and that allah is oftreturning full of wisdom ye would be ruined indeed.
those who brought forward the lie are a body among yourselves think it not to be an evil to you on the contrary it is good for you to every man among them will come the punishment of the sin that he earned and to him who took on himself the lead among them will be a penalty grievous.
why did not the believers  men and women  when ye heard of the affairname this charge is an obvious lie
why did they not bring four witnesses to prove it when they have not brought the witnesses such men in the sight of allah stand forth themselves as liars
were it not for the grace and mercy of allah on you in this world and the hereafter a grievous penalty would have seized you in that ye rushed glibly into this affair.
behold ye received it on your tongues and said out of your mouths things of which ye had no knowledge and ye thought it to be a light matter while it was most serious in the sight of allah.
and why did ye not when ye heard it say  it is not right of us to speak of this glory to allah this is a most serious slander
allah doth admonish you that ye may never repeat such conduct if ye are true believers.
and allah makes the signs plain to you for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
those who love to see scandal published broadcast among the believers will have a grievous penalty in this life and in the hereafter allah knows and ye know not.
were it not for the grace and mercy of allah on you and that allah is full of kindness and mercy ye would be ruined indeed.
o ye who believe follow not satanxbs footsteps if any will follow the footsteps of satan he will but command what is shameful and wrong and were it not for the grace and mercy of allah on you not one of you would ever have been pure but allah doth purify whom he pleases and allah is one who hears and knows all things.
let not those among you who are endued with grace and amplitude of means resolve by oath against helping their kinsmen those in want and those who have left their homes in allahxbs cause let them forgive and overlook do you not wish that allah should forgive you for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
those who slander chaste women indiscreet but believing are cursed in this life and in the hereafter for them is a grievous penalty
on the day when their tongues their hands and their feet will bear witness against them as to their actions.
on that day allah will pay them back all their just dues and they will realise that allah is the very truth that makes all things manifest.
women impure are for men impure and men impure for women impure and women of purity are for men of purity and men of purity are for women of purity these are not affected by what people say for them there is forgiveness and a provision honourable.
o ye who believe enter not houses other than your own until ye have asked permission and saluted those in them that is best for you in order that ye may heed what is seemly.
if ye find no one in the house enter not until permission is given to you if ye are asked to go back go back that makes for greater purity for yourselves and allah knows well all that ye do.
it is no fault on your part to enter houses not used for living in which serve some other use for you and allah has knowledge of what ye reveal and what ye conceal.
say to the believing men that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty that will make for greater purity for them and allah is well acquainted with all that they do.
and say to the believing women that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty that they should not display their beauty and ornaments except what must ordinarily appear thereof that they should draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their beauty except to their husbands their fathers their husbandxbs fathers their sons their husbandsxb sons their brothers or their brothersxb sons or their sistersxb sons or their women or the slaves whom their right hands possess or male servants free of physical needs or small children who have no sense of the shame of sex and that they should not strike their feet in order to draw attention to their hidden ornaments. and o ye believers turn ye all together towards allah that ye may attain bliss.
marry those among you who are single or the virtuous ones among yourselves male or female if they are in poverty allah will give them means out of his grace for allah encompasseth all and he knoweth all things.
let those who find not the wherewithal for marriage keep themselves chaste until allah gives them means out of his grace. and if any of your slaves ask for a deed in writing to enable them to earn their freedom for a certain sum give them such a deed if ye know any good in them yea give them something yourselves out of the means which allah has given to you. but force not your maids to prostitution when they desire chastity in order that ye may make a gain in the goods of this life. but if anyone compels them yet after such compulsion is allah oftforgiving most merciful to them
we have already sent down to you verses making things clear an illustration from the story of people who passed away before you and an admonition for those who fear allah.
allah is the light of the heavens and the earth. the parable of his light is as if there were a niche and within it a lamp the lamp enclosed in glass the glass as it were a brilliant star lit from a blessed tree an olive neither of the east nor of the west whose oil is wellnigh luminous though fire scarce touched it light upon light allah doth guide whom he will to his light allah doth set forth parables for men and allah doth know all things.
lit is such a light in houses which allah hath permitted to be raised to honour for the celebration in them of his name in them is he glorified in the mornings and in the evenings again and again
by men whom neither traffic nor merchandise can divert from the remembrance of allah nor from regular prayer nor from the practice of regular charity their only fear is for the day when hearts and eyes will be transformed in a world wholly new
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds and add even more for them out of his grace for allah doth provide for those whom he will without measure.
but the unbelieversname which the man parched with thirst mistakes for water until when he comes up to it he finds it to be nothing but he finds allah ever with him and allah will pay him his account and allah is swift in taking account.
or the unbelieversxb state is like the depths of darkness in a vast deep ocean overwhelmed with billow topped by billow topped by dark clouds depths of darkness one above another if a man stretches out his hands he can hardly see it for any to whom allah giveth not light there is no light
seest thou not that it is allah whose praises all beings in the heavens and on earth do celebrate and the birds of the air with wings outspread each one knows its own mode of prayer and praise. and allah knows well all that they do.
yea to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and to allah is the final goal of all.
seest thou not that allah makes the clouds move gently then joins them together then makes them into a heap  then wilt thou see rain issue forth from their midst. and he sends down from the sky mountain masses of clouds wherein is hail he strikes therewith whom he pleases and he turns it away from whom he pleases the vivid flash of his lightning wellnigh blinds the sight.
it is allah who alternates the night and the day verily in these things is an instructive example for those who have vision
and allah has created every animal from water of them there are some that creep on their bellies some that walk on two legs and some that walk on four. allah creates what he wills for verily allah has power over all things.
we have indeed sent down signs that make things manifest and allah guides whom he wills to a way that is straight.
they say we believe in allah and in the messenger and we obey but even after that some of them turn away they are not really believers.
when they are summoned to allah and his messenger in order that he may judge between them behold some of them decline to come.
but if the right is on their side they come to him with all submission.
is it that there is a disease in their hearts or do they doubt or are they in fear that allah and his messenger will deal unjustly with them nay it is they themselves who do wrong.
the answer of the believers when summoned to allah and his messenger in order that he may judge between them is no other than this they say we hear and we obey it is such as these that will attain felicity.
it is such as obey allah and his messenger and fear allah and do right that will win in the end
they swear their strongest oaths by allah that if only thou wouldst command them they would leave their homes. say swear ye not obedience is more reasonable verily allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.
say obey allah and obey the messenger but if ye turn away he is only responsible for the duty placed on him and ye for that placed on you. if ye obey him ye shall be on right guidance. the messengerxbs duty is only to preach the clear message.
allah has promised to those among you who believe and work righteous deeds that he will of a surety grant them in the land inheritance of power as he granted it to those before them that he will establish in authority their religion  the one which he has chosen for them and that he will change their state after the fear in which they lived to one of security and peace xbthey will worship me alone and not associate aught with me. xbif any do reject faith after this they are rebellious and wicked.
so establish regular prayer and give regular charity and obey the messenger that ye may receive mercy.
never think thou that the unbelievers are going to frustrate allahxbs plan on earth their abode is the fire and it is indeed an evil refuge
o ye who believe let those whom your right hands possess and the children among you who have not come of age ask your permission before they come to your presence on three occasions before morning prayer the while ye doff your clothes for the noonday heat and after the latenight prayer these are your three times of undress outside those times it is not wrong for you or for them to move about attending to each other thus does allah make clear the signs to you for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
but when the children among you come of age let them also ask for permission as do those senior to them in age thus does allah make clear his signs to you for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
such elderly women as are past the prospect of marriagename provided they make not a wanton display of their beauty but it is best for them to be modest and allah is one who sees and knows all things.
it is no fault in the blind nor in one born lame nor in one afflicted with illness nor in yourselves that ye should eat in your own houses or those of your fathers or your mothers or your brothers or your sisters or your fatherxbs brothers or your fatherxbs sisters or your mohterxbs brothers or your motherxbs sisters or in houses of which the keys are in your possession or in the house of a sincere friend of yours there is no blame on you whether ye eat in company or separately. but if ye enter houses salute each other  a greeting of blessing and purity as from allah. thus does allah make clear the signs to you that ye may understand.
only those are believers who believe in allah and his messenger when they are with him on a matter requiring collective action they do not depart until they have asked for his leave those who ask for thy leave are those who believe in allah and his messenger so when they ask for thy leave for some business of theirs give leave to those of them whom thou wilt and ask allah for their forgiveness for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
deem not the summons of the messenger among yourselves like the summons of one of you to another allah doth know those of you who slip away under shelter of some excuse then let those beware who withstand the messengerxbs order lest some trial befall them or a grievous penalty be inflicted on them.
be quite sure that to allah doth belong whatever is in the heavens and on earth. well doth he know what ye are intent upon and one day they will be brought back to him and he will tell them the truth of what they did for allah doth know all things.
blessed is he who sent down the criterion to his servant that it may be an admonition to all creatures
he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth no son has he begotten nor has he a partner in his dominion it is he who created all things and ordered them in due proportions.
yet have they taken besides him gods that can create nothing but are themselves created that have no control of hurt or good to themselves nor can they control death nor life nor resurrection.
but the misbelievers say naught is this but a lie which he has forged and others have helped him at it. in truth it is they who have put forward an iniquity and a falsehood.
and they say tales of the ancients which he has caused to be written and they are dictated before him morning and evening.
say the qurxban was sent down by him who knows the mystery that is in the heavens and the earth verily he is oftforgiving most merciful.
and they say what sort of a messenger is this who eats food and walks through the streets why has not an angel been sent down to him to give admonition with him
or why has not a treasure been bestowed on him or why has he not a garden for enjoyment the wicked say ye follow none other than a man bewitched.
see what kinds of comparisons they make for thee but they have gone astray and never a way will they be able to find
blessed is he who if that were his will could give thee better things than those gardens beneath which rivers flow and he could give thee palaces secure to dwell in.
nay they deny the hour of the judgment to come but we have prepared a blazing fire for such as deny the hour
when it sees them from a place far off they will hear its fury and its ranging sigh.
and when they are cast bound together into a constricted place therein they will plead for destruction there and then
this day plead not for a single destruction plead for destruction oftrepeated
say is that best or the eternal garden promised to the righteous for them that is a reward as well as a goal of attainment.
for them there will be therein all that they wish for they will dwell there for aye a promise to be prayed for from thy lord.
the day he will gather them together as well as those whom they worship besides allah he will ask was it ye who let these my servants astray or did they stray from the path themselves
they will say glory to thee not meet was it for us that we should take for protectors others besides thee but thou didst bestow on them and their fathers good things in life until they forgot the message for they were a people worthless and lost.
allah will say now have they proved you liars in what ye say so ye cannot avert your penalty nor get help. and whoever among you does wrong him shall we cause to taste of a grievous penalty.
and the messengers whom we sent before thee were all men who ate food and walked through the streets we have made some of you as a trial for others will ye have patience for allah is one who sees all things.
such as fear not the meeting with us for judgment say why are not the angels sent down to us or why do we not see our lord indeed they have an arrogant conceit of themselves and mighty is the insolence of their impiety
the day they see the angels no joy will there be to the sinners that day the angels will say there is a barrier forbidden to you altogether
and we shall turn to whatever deeds they did in this life and we shall make such deeds as floating dust scattered about.
the companions of the garden will be well that day in their abode and have the fairest of places for repose.
the day the heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds and angels shall be sent down descending in ranks
that day the dominion as of right and truth shall be wholly for allah most merciful it will be a day of dire difficulty for the misbelievers.
the day that the wrongdoer will bite at his hands he will say oh would that i had taken a straight path with the messenger
ah woe is me would that i had never taken such a one for a friend
he did lead me astray from the message of allah after it had come to me ah the evil one is but a traitor to man
then the messenger will say o my lord truly my people took this qurxban for just foolish nonsense.
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy among the sinners but enough is thy lord to guide and to help.
those who reject faith say why is not the qurxban revealed to him all at once thus is it revealed that we may strengthen thy heart thereby and we have rehearsed it to thee in slow wellarranged stages gradually.
and no question do they bring to thee but we reveal to thee the truth and the best explanation thereof.
those who will be gathered to hell prone on their facesname and as to path most astray.
before this we sent moses the book and appointed his brother aaron with him as minister
and we command go ye both to the people who have rejected our signs and those people we destroyed with utter destruction.
and the people of noahname we drowned them and we made them as a sign for mankind and we have prepared for all wrongdoers a grievous penalty
as also xbad and thamud and the companions of the rass and many a generation between them.
to each one we set forth parables and examples and each one we broke to utter annihilation for their sins.
and the unbelievers must indeed have passed by the town on which was rained a shower of evil did they not then see it with their own eyes but they fear not the resurrection.
when they see thee they treat thee no otherwise than in mockery is this the one whom allah has sent as a messenger
he indeed would wellnigh have misled us from our gods had it not been that we were constant to them  soon will they know when they see the penalty who it is that is most misled in path
seest thou such a one as taketh for his god his own passion or impulse couldst thou be a disposer of affairs for him
or thinkest thou that most of them listen or understand they are only like cattle nay they are worse astray in path.
hast thou not turned thy vision to thy lord how he doth prolong the shadow if he willed he could make it stationary then do we make the sun its guide
then we draw it in towards ourselvesname
and he it is who makes the night as a robe for you and sleep as repose and makes the day as it were a resurrection.
and he it is who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings going before his mercy and we send down pure water from the sky
that with it we may give life to a dead land and slake the thirst of things we have createdname
and we have distributed the water amongst them in order that they may celebrate our praises but most men are averse to aught but rank ingratitude.
had it been our will we could have sent a warner to every centre of population.
therefore listen not to the unbelievers but strive against them with the utmost strenuousness with the qurxban.
it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water one palatable and sweet and the other salt and bitter yet has he made a barrier between them a partition that is forbidden to be passed.
it is he who has created man from water then has he established relationships of lineage and marriage for thy lord has power over all things.
yet do they worship besides allah things that can neither profit them nor harm them and the misbeliever is a helper of evil against his own lord
but thee we only sent to give glad tidings and admonition.
say no reward do i ask of you for it but this that each one who will may take a straight path to his lord.
and put thy trust in him who lives and dies not and celebrate his praise and enough is he to be acquainted with the faults of his servants
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between in six days and is firmly established on the throne of authority allah most gracious ask thou then about him of any acquainted with such things.
when it is said to them prostrate to allah most gracious they say and what is allah most gracious shall we prostrate to that which thou commandest us and it increases their flight from the truth.
blessed is he who made constellations in the skies and placed therein a lamp and a moon giving light
and it is he who made the night and the day to follow each other for such as have the will to celebrate his praises or to show their gratitude.
and the servants of allah most gracious are those who walk on the earth in humility and when the ignorant address them they say peace
those who spend the night in adoration of their lord prostrate and standing
those who say our lord avert from us the wrath of hell for its wrath is indeed an affliction grievous
evil indeed is it as an abode and as a place to rest in
those who when they spend are not extravagant and not niggardly but hold a just balance between those extremes
those who invoke not with allah any other god nor slay such life as allah has made sacred except for just cause nor commit fornication  and any that does this not only meets punishment.
but the penalty on the day of judgment will be doubled to him and he will dwell therein in ignominy
unless he repents believes and works righteous deeds for allah will change the evil of such persons into good and allah is oftforgiving most merciful
and whoever repents and does good has truly turned to allah with an acceptable conversion
those who witness no falsehood and if they pass by futility they pass by it with honourable avoidance
those who when they are admonished with the signs of their lord droop not down at them as if they were deaf or blind
and those who pray our lord grant unto us wives and offspring who will be the comfort of our eyes and give us the grace to lead the righteous.
those are the ones who will be rewarded with the highest place in heaven because of their patient constancy therein shall they be met with salutations and peace
dwelling therein how beautiful an abode and place of rest
say to the rejecters my lord is not uneasy because of you if ye call not on him but ye have indeed rejected him and soon will come the inevitable punishment
ta. sin. mim.
these are verses of the book that makes things clear.
it may be thou frettest thy soul with grief that they do not become believers.
if such were our will we could send down to them from the sky a sign to which they would bend their necks in humility.
but there comes not to them a newlyrevealed message from allah most gracious but they turn away therefrom.
they have indeed rejected the message so they will know soon enough the truth of what they mocked at
do they not look at the earthname
verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
behold thy lord called moses go to the people of iniquity
the people of the pharaoh will they not fear allah
he said o my lord i do fear that they will charge me with falsehood
my breast will be straitened. and my speech may not go smoothly so send unto aaron.
and further they have a charge of crime against me and i fear they may slay me.
allah said by no means proceed then both of you with our signs we are with you and will listen to your call.
so go forth both of you to pharaoh and say xbwe have been sent by the lord and cherisher of the worlds
xbsend thou with us the children of israel.xb
pharaoh said did we not cherish thee as a child among us and didst thou not stay in our midst many years of thy life
and thou didst a deed of thine which thou knowest thou didst and thou art an ungrateful wretch
moses said i did it then when i was in error.
so i fled from you all when i feared you but my lord has since invested me with judgment and wisdom and appointed me as one of the messengers.
and this is the favour with which thou dost reproach me that thou hast enslaved the children of israel
pharaoh said and what is the xblord and cherisher of the worldsxb
moses said the lord and cherisher of the heavens and the earth and all between if ye want to be quite sure.
pharaoh said to those around did ye not listen to what he says
moses said your lord and the lord of your fathers from the beginning
pharaoh said truly your messenger who has been sent to you is a veritable madman
moses said lord of the east and the west and all between if ye only had sense
pharaoh said if thou dost put forward any god other than me i will certainly put thee in prison
moses said even if i showed you something clear and convincing
pharaoh said show it then if thou tellest the truth
so moses threw his rod and behold it was a serpent plain for all to see
and he drew out his hand and behold it was white to all beholders
pharaoh said to the chiefs around him this is indeed a sorcerer wellversed
his plan is to get you out of your land by his sorcery then what is it ye counsel
they said keep him and his brother in suspense for a while and dispatch to the cities heralds to collect
and bring up to thee all our sorcerers wellversed.
so the sorcerers were got together for the appointment of a day wellknown
and the people were told are ye now assembled
that we may follow the sorcerers in religion if they win
so when the sorcerers arrived they said to pharaoh of course  shall we have a suitable reward if we win
he said yea and more for ye shall in that case be raised to posts nearest to my person.
moses said to them throw ye  that which ye are about to throw
so they threw their ropes and their rods and said by the might of pharaoh it is we who will certainly win
then moses threw his rod when behold it straightway swallows up all the falsehoods which they fake
then did the sorcerers fall down prostrate in adoration
saying we believe in the lord of the worlds
the lord of moses and aaron.
said pharaoh believe ye in him before i give you permission surely he is your leader who has taught you sorcery but soon shall ye know be sure i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides and i will cause you all to die on the cross
they said no matter for us we shall but return to our lord
only our desire is that our lord will forgive us our faults that we may become foremost among the believers
by inspiration we told moses travel by night with my servants for surely ye shall be pursued.
then pharaoh sent heralds to all the cities
saying these israelites are but a small band
and they are raging furiously against us
but we are a multitude amply forewarned.
so we expelled them from gardens springs
treasures and every kind of honourable position
thus it was but we made the children of israel inheritors of such things.
so they pursued them at sunrise.
and when the two bodies saw each other the people of moses said we are sure to be overtaken.
moses said by no means my lord is with me soon will he guide me
then we told moses by inspiration strike the sea with thy rod. so it divided and each separate part became like the huge firm mass of a mountain.
and we made the other party approach thither.
we delivered moses and all who were with him
but we drowned the others.
verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
and rehearse to them something of abrahamxbs story.
behold he said to his father and his people what worship ye
they said we worship idols and we remain constantly in attendance on them.
he said do they listen to you when ye call on them
or do you good or harm
they said nay but we found our fathers doing thus what we do.
he said do ye then see whom ye have been worshipping
ye and your fathers before you
for they are enemies to me not so the lord and cherisher of the worlds
who created me and it is he who guides me
who gives me food and drink
and when i am ill it is he who cures me
who will cause me to die and then to life again
and who i hope will forgive me my faults on the day of judgment.
o my lord bestow wisdom on me and join me with the righteous
grant me honourable mention on the tongue of truth among the latest generations
make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss
forgive my father for that he is among those astray
and let me not be in disgrace on the day when men will be raised up
the day whereon neither wealth nor sons will avail
but only he will prosper that brings to allah a sound heart
to the righteous the garden will be brought near
and to those straying in evil the fire will be placed in full view
and it shall be said to them xbwhere are the gods ye worshipped
xbbesides allah can they help you or help themselvesxb
then they will be thrown headlong into the firename
and the whole hosts of iblis together.
they will say there in their mutual bickerings
xbby allah we were truly in an error manifest
xbwhen we held you as equals with the lord of the worlds
xband our seducers were only those who were steeped in guilt.
xbnow then we have none to intercede for us
xbnor a single friend to feel for us.
xbnow if we only had a chance of return we shall truly be of those who believexb
verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
the people of noah rejected the messengers.
behold their brother noah said to them will ye not fear allah
i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust
so fear allah and obey me.
no reward do i ask of you for it my reward is only from the lord of the worlds
so fear allah and obey me.
they said shall we believe in thee when it is the meanest that follow thee
he said and what do i know as to what they do
their account is only with my lord if ye could but understand.
i am not one to drive away those who believe.
i am sent only to warn plainly in public.
they said if thou desist not o noah thou shalt be stoned to death.
he said o my lord truly my people have rejected me.
judge thou then between me and them openly and deliver me and those of the believers who are with me.
so we delivered him and those with him in the ark filled with all creatures.
thereafter we drowned those who remained behind.
verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
the xbad people rejected the messengers.
behold their brother hud said to them will ye not fear allah
i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust
so fear allah and obey me.
no reward do i ask of you for it my reward is only from the lord of the worlds.
do ye build a landmark on every high place to amuse yourselves
and do ye get for yourselves fine buildings in the hope of living therein for ever
and when ye exert your strong hand do ye do it like men of absolute power
now fear allah and obey me.
yea fear him who has bestowed on you freely all that ye know.
freely has he bestowed on you cattle and sons
and gardens and springs.
truly i fear for you the penalty of a great day.
they said it is the same to us whether thou admonish us or be not among our admonishers
this is no other than a customary device of the ancients
and we are not the ones to receive pains and penalties
so they rejected him and we destroyed them. verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
the thamud people rejected the messengers.
behold their brother salih said to them will you not fear allah
i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust.
so fear allah and obey me.
no reward do i ask of you for it my reward is only from the lord of the worlds.
will ye be left secure in the enjoyment of all that ye have here
gardens and springs
and cornfields and datepalms with spathes near breaking with the weight of fruit
and ye carve houses out of rocky mountains with great skill.
but fear allah and obey me
and follow not the bidding of those who are extravagant
who make mischief in the land and mend not their ways.
they said thou art only one of those bewitched
thou art no more than a mortal like us then bring us a sign if thou tellest the truth
he said here is a shecamel she has a right of watering and ye have a right of watering severally on a day appointed.
touch her not with harm lest the penalty of a great day seize you.
but they hamstrung her then did they become full of regrets.
but the penalty seized them. verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
the people of lut rejected the messengers.
behold their brother lut said to them will ye not fear allah
i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust.
so fear allah and obey me.
no reward do i ask of you for it my reward is only from the lord of the worlds.
of all the creatures in the world will ye approach males
and leave those whom allah has created for you to be your mates nay ye are a people transgressing all limits
they said if thou desist not o lut thou wilt assuredly be cast out
he said i do detest your doings.
o my lord deliver me and my family from such things as they do
so we delivered him and his familyname
except an old woman who lingered behind.
but the rest we destroyed utterly.
we rained down on them a shower of brimstone and evil was the shower on those who were admonished but heeded not
verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
the companions of the wood rejected the messengers.
behold shuxbaib said to them will ye not fear allah
i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust.
so fear allah and obey me.
no reward do i ask of you for it my reward is only from the lord of the worlds.
give just measure and cause no loss to others by fraud.
and weigh with scales true and upright.
and withhold not things justly due to men nor do evil in the land working mischief.
and fear him who created you and who created the generations before you
they said thou art only one of those bewitched
thou art no more than a mortal like us and indeed we think thou art a liar
now cause a piece of the sky to fall on us if thou art truthful
he said my lord knows best what ye do.
but they rejected him. then the punishment of a day of overshadowing gloom seized them and that was the penalty of a great day.
verily in that is a sign but most of them do not believe.
and verily thy lord is he the exalted in might most merciful.
verily this is a revelation from the lord of the worlds
with it came down the spirit of faith and truth
to thy heart and mind that thou mayest admonish.
in the perspicuous arabic tongue.
without doubt it is announced in the mystic books of former peoples.
is it not a sign to them that the learned of the children of israel knew it as true
had we revealed it to any of the nonarabs
and had he recited it to them they would not have believed in it.
thus have we caused it to enter the hearts of the sinners.
they will not believe in it until they see the grievous penalty
but the penalty will come to them of a sudden while they perceive it not
then they will say shall we be respited
do they then ask for our penalty to be hastened on
seest thou if we do let them enjoy this life for a few years
yet there comes to them at length the punishment which they were promised
it will profit them not that they enjoyed this life
never did we destroy a population but had its warners 
by way of reminder and we never are unjust.
no evil ones have brought down this revelation
it would neither suit them nor would they be able to produce it.
indeed they have been removed far from even a chance of hearing it.
so call not on any other god with allah or thou wilt be among those under the penalty.
and admonish thy nearest kinsmen
and lower thy wing to the believers who follow thee.
then if they disobey thee say i am free of responsibility for what ye do
and put thy trust on the exalted in might the merciful
who seeth thee standing forth in prayer
and thy movements among those who prostrate themselves
for it is he who heareth and knoweth all things.
shall i inform you o people on whom it is that the evil ones descend
they descend on every lying wicked person
into whose ears they pour hearsay vanities and most of them are liars.
and the poetsname who follow them
seest thou not that they wander distracted in every valley
and that they say what they practise not
except those who believe work righteousness engage much in the remembrance of allah and defend themselves only after they are unjustly attacked. and soon will the unjust assailants know what vicissitudes their affairs will take
these are verses of the qurxbana book that makes things clear
a guide and glad tidings for the believers
those who establish regular prayers and give in regular charity and also have full assurance of the hereafter.
as to those who believe not in the hereafter we have made their deeds pleasing in their eyes and so they wander about in distraction.
such are they for whom a grievous penalty is waiting and in the hereafter theirs will be the greatest loss.
as to thee the qurxban is bestowed upon thee from the presence of one who is wise and allknowing.
behold moses said to his family i perceive a fire soon will i bring you from there some information or i will bring you a burning brand to light our fuel that ye may warm yourselves.
but when he came to the fire a voice was heard blessed are those in the fire and those around and glory to allah the lord of the worlds.
o moses verily i am allah the exalted in might the wise....
now do thou throw thy rod but when he saw it moving of its own accordas if it had been a snake he turned back in retreat and retraced not his steps o moses it was said fear not truly in my presence those called as messengers have no fear
but if any have done wrong and have thereafter substituted good to take the place of evil truly i am oftforgiving most merciful.
now put thy hand into thy bosom and it will come forth white without stain or harm these are among the nine signs thou wilt take to pharaoh and his people for they are a people rebellious in transgression.
but when our signs came to them that should have opened their eyes they said this is sorcery manifest
and they rejected those signs in iniquity and arrogance though their souls were convinced thereof so see what was the end of those who acted corruptly
we gave in the past knowledge to david and solomon and they both said praise be to allah who has favoured us above many of his servants who believe
and solomon was davidxbs heir. he said o ye people we have been taught the speech of birds and on us has been bestowed a little of all things this is indeed grace manifest from allah.
and before solomon were marshalled his hostsname and they were all kept in order and ranks.
at length when they came to a lowly valley of ants one of the ants said o ye ants get into your habitations lest solomon and his hosts crush you under foot without knowing it.
so he smiled amused at her speech and he said o my lord so order me that i may be grateful for thy favours which thou hast bestowed on me and on my parents and that i may work the righteousness that will please thee and admit me by thy grace to the ranks of thy righteous servants.
and he took a muster of the birds and he said why is it i see not the hoopoe or is he among the absentees
i will certainly punish him with a severe penalty or execute him unless he bring me a clear reason for absence.
but the hoopoe tarried not far he came up and said i have compassed territory which thou hast not compassed and i have come to thee from saba with tidings true.
i found there a woman ruling over them and provided with every requisite and she has a magnificent throne.
i found her and her people worshipping the sun besides allah satan has made their deeds seem pleasing in their eyes and has kept them away from the pathname
kept them away from the path that they should not worship allah who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows what ye hide and what ye reveal.
allah there is no god but he lord of the throne supreme
solomon said soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied
go thou with this letter of mine and deliver it to them then draw back from them and wait to see what answer they return...
the queen said ye chiefs here is delivered to me  a letter worthy of respect.
it is from solomon and is as follows xbin the name of allah most gracious most merciful
xbbe ye not arrogant against me but come to me in submission to the true religion.xb
she said ye chiefs advise me in this my affair no affair have i decided except in your presence.
they said we are endued with strength and given to vehement war but the command is with thee so consider what thou wilt command.
she said kings when they enter a country despoil it and make the noblest of its people its meanest thus do they behave.
but i am going to send him a present and wait to see with what answer return my ambassadors.
now when the embassy came to solomon he said will ye give me abundance in wealth but that which allah has given me is better than that which he has given you nay it is ye who rejoice in your gift
go back to them and be sure we shall come to them with such hosts as they will never be able to meet we shall expel them from there in disgrace and they will feel humbled indeed.
he said to his own men ye chiefs which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission
said an xbifrit of the jinns i will bring it to thee before thou rise from thy council indeed i have full strength for the purpose and may be trusted.
said one who had knowledge of the book i will bring it to thee within the twinkling of an eye then when solomon saw it placed firmly before him he said this is by the grace of my lord to test me whether i am grateful or ungrateful and if any is grateful truly his gratitude is a gain for his own soul but if any is ungrateful truly my lord is free of all needs supreme in honour 
he said transform her throne out of all recognition by her let us see whether she is guided to the truth or is one of those who receive no guidance.
so when she arrived she was asked is this thy throne she said it was just like this and knowledge was bestowed on us in advance of this and we have submitted to allah in islam.
and he diverted her from the worship of others besides allah for she was sprung of a people that had no faith.
she was asked to enter the lofty palace but when she saw it she thought it was a lake of water and she tucked up her skirts uncovering her legs. he said this is but a palace paved smooth with slabs of glass. she said o my lord i have indeed wronged my soul i do now submit in islam with solomon to the lord of the worlds.
we sent aforetime to the thamud their brother salih saying serve allah but behold they became two factions quarrelling with each other.
he said o my people why ask ye to hasten on the evil in preference to the good if only ye ask allah for forgiveness ye may hope to receive mercy.
they said ill omen do we augur from thee and those that are with thee. he said your ill omen is with allah yea ye are a people under trial.
there were in the city nine men of a family who made mischief in the land and would not reform.
they said swear a mutual oath by allah that we shall make a secret night attack on him and his people and that we shall then say to his heir when he seeks vengeance xbwe were not present at the slaughter of his people and we are positively telling the truth.xb
they plotted and planned but we too planned even while they perceived it not.
then see what was the end of their plot this that we destroyed them and their people all of them.
now such were their houses  in utter ruin  because they practised wrongdoing. verily in this is a sign for people of knowledge.
and we saved those who believed and practised righteousness.
we also sent lut as a messenger behold he said to his people do ye do what is shameful though ye see its iniquity
would ye really approach men in your lusts rather than women nay ye are a people grossly ignorant
but his people gave no other answer but this they said drive out the followers of lut from your city these are indeed men who want to be clean and pure
but we saved him and his family except his wife her we destined to be of those who lagged behind.
and we rained down on them a shower of brimstone and evil was the shower on those who were admonished but heeded not
say praise be to allah and peace on his servants whom he has chosen for his message. who is better allah or the false gods they associate with him
or who has created the heavens and the earth and who sends you down rain from the sky yea with it we cause to grow wellplanted orchards full of beauty of delight it is not in your power to cause the growth of the trees in them. can there be another god besides allah nay they are a people who swerve from justice.
or who has made the earth firm to live in made rivers in its midst set thereon mountains immovable and made a separating bar between the two bodies of flowing water can there be another god besides allah nay most of them know not.
or who listens to the soul distressed when it calls on him and who relieves its suffering and makes you mankind inheritors of the earth can there be another god besides allah little it is that ye heed
or who guides you through the depths of darkness on land and sea and who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings going before his mercy can there be another god besides allah high is allah above what they associate with him
or who originates creation then repeats it and who gives you sustenance from heaven and earth can there be another god besides allah say bring forth your argument if ye are telling the truth
say none in the heavens or on earth except allah knows what is hidden nor can they perceive when they shall be raised up for judgment.
still less can their knowledge comprehend the hereafter nay they are in doubt and uncertainty thereanent nay they are blind thereunto
the unbelievers say what when we become dustname shall we really be raised from the dead
it is true we were promised this we and our fathers before us these are nothing but tales of the ancients.
say go ye through the earth and see what has been the end of those guilty of sin.
but grieve not over them nor distress thyself because of their plots.
they also say when will this promise come to pass say if ye are truthful.
say it may be that some of the events which ye wish to hasten on may be close in your pursuit
but verily thy lord is full of grace to mankind yet most of them are ungrateful.
and verily thy lord knoweth all that their hearts do hide. as well as all that they reveal.
nor is there aught of the unseen in heaven or earth but is recorded in a clear record.
verily this qurxban doth explain to the children of israel most of the matters in which they disagree.
and it certainly is a guide and a mercy to those who believe.
verily thy lord will decide between them by his decree and he is exalted in might allknowing.
so put thy trust in allah for thou art on the path of manifest truth.
truly thou canst not cause the dead to listen nor canst thou cause the deaf to hear the call especially when they turn back in retreat.
nor canst thou be a guide to the blind to prevent them from straying only those wilt thou get to listen who believe in our signs and they will bow in islam.
and when the word is fulfilled against them the unjust we shall produce from the earth a beast to face them he will speak to them for that mankind did not believe with assurance in our signs.
one day we shall gather together from every people a troop of those who reject our signs and they shall be kept in ranks
until when they come before the judgmentseat allah will say did ye reject my signs though ye comprehended them not in knowledge or what was it ye did
and the word will be fulfilled against them because of their wrongdoing and they will be unable to speak in plea.
see they not that we have made the night for them to rest in and the day to give them light verily in this are signs for any people that believe
and the day that the trumpet will be sounded  then will be smitten with terror those who are in the heavens and those who are on earth except such as allah will please to exempt and all shall come to his presence as beings conscious of their lowliness.
thou seest the mountains and thinkest them firmly fixed but they shall pass away as the clouds pass away such is the artistry of allah who disposes of all things in perfect order for he is well acquainted with all that ye do.
if any do good good will accrue to them therefrom and they will be secure from terror that day.
and if any do evil their faces will be thrown headlong into the fire do ye receive a reward other than that which ye have earned by your deeds
for me i have been commanded to serve the lord of this city him who has sanctified it and to whom belong all things and i am commanded to be of those who bow in islam to allahxbs will
and to rehearse the qurxban and if any accept guidance they do it for the good of their own souls and if any stray say i am only a warner.
and say praise be to allah who will soon show you his signs so that ye shall know them and thy lord is not unmindful of all that ye do.
ta. sin. mim.
these are verses of the book that makes things clear.
we rehearse to thee some of the story of moses and pharaoh in truth for people who believe.
truly pharaoh elated himself in the land and broke up its people into sections depressing a small group among them their sons he slew but he kept alive their females for he was indeed a maker of mischief.
and we wished to be gracious to those who were being depressed in the land to make them leaders in faith and make them heirs
to establish a firm place for them in the land and to show pharaoh haman and their hosts at their hands the very things against which they were taking precautions.
so we sent this inspiration to the mother of moses suckle thy child but when thou hast fears about him cast him into the river but fear not nor grieve for we shall restore him to thee and we shall make him one of our messengers.
then the people of pharaoh picked him up from the river it was intended that moses should be to them an adversary and a cause of sorrow for pharaoh and haman and all their hosts were men of sin.
the wife of pharaoh said here is joy of the eye for me and for thee slay him not. it may be that he will be use to us or we may adopt him as a son. and they perceived not what they were doing
but there came to be a void in the heart of the mother of moses she was going almost to disclose his case had we not strengthened her heart with faith so that she might remain a firm believer.
and she said to the sister of moses follow him so she the sister watched him in the character of a stranger. and they knew not.
and we ordained that he refused suck at first until his sister came up and said shall i point out to you the people of a house that will nourish and bring him up for you and be sincerely attached to him...
thus did we restore him to his mother that her eye might be comforted that she might not grieve and that she might know that the promise of allah is true but most of them do not understand.
when he reached full age and was firmly established in life we bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge for thus do we reward those who do good.
and he entered the city at a time when its people were not watching and he found there two men fightingname and the other of his foes. now the man of his own religion appealed to him against his foe and moses struck him with his fist and made an end of him. he said this is a work of evil satan for he is an enemy that manifestly misleads
he prayed o my lord i have indeed wronged my soul do thou then forgive me so allah forgave him for he is the oftforgiving most merciful.
he said o my lord for that thou hast bestowed thy grace on me never shall i be a help to those who sin
so he saw the morning in the city looking about in a state of fear when behold the man who had the day before sought his help called aloud for his help again. moses said to him thou art truly it is clear a quarrelsome fellow
then when he decided to lay hold of the man who was an enemy to both of them that man said o moses is it thy intention to slay me as thou slewest a man yesterday thy intention is none other than to become a powerful violent man in the land and not to be one who sets things right
and there came a man running from the furthest end of the city. he said o moses the chiefs are taking counsel together about thee to slay thee so get thee away for i do give thee sincere advice.
he therefore got away therefrom looking about in a state of fear. he prayed o my lord save me from people given to wrongdoing.
then when he turned his face towards the land of madyan he said i do hope that my lord will show me the smooth and straight path.
and when he arrived at the watering place in madyan he found there a group of men watering their flocks and besides them he found two women who were keeping back their flocks. he said what is the matter with you they said we cannot water our flocks until the shepherds take back their flocks and our father is a very old man.
so he watered their flocks for them then he turned back to the shade and saido my lord truly am i in desperate need of any good that thou dost send me
afterwards one of the damsels came back to him walking bashfully. she said my father invites thee that he may reward thee for having watered our flocks for us. so when he came to him and narrated the story he said fear thou not well hast thou escaped from unjust people.
said one of the damsels o my dear father engage him on wages truly the best of men for thee to employ is the man who is strong and trusty....
he said i intend to wed one of these my daughters to thee on condition that thou serve me for eight years but if thou complete ten years it will be grace from thee. but i intend not to place thee under a difficulty thou wilt find me indeed if allah wills one of the righteous.
he said be that the agreement between me and thee whichever of the two terms i fulfil let there be no illwill to me. be allah a witness to what we say.
now when moses had fulfilled the term and was travelling with his family he perceived a fire in the direction of mount tur. he said to his family tarry ye i perceive a fire i hope to bring you from there some information or a burning firebrand that ye may warm yourselves.
but when he came to the fire a voice was heard from the right bank of the valley from a tree in hallowed ground o moses verily i am allah the lord of the worlds....
now do thou throw thy rod but when he saw it moving of its own accord as if it had been a snake he turned back in retreat and retraced not his steps o moses it was said draw near and fear not for thou art of those who are secure.
move thy hand into thy bosom and it will come forth white without stain or harm and draw thy hand close to thy side to guard against fear. those are the two credentials from thy lord to pharaoh and his chiefs for truly they are a people rebellious and wicked.
he said o my lord i have slain a man among them and i fear lest they slay me.
and my brother aaron  he is more eloquent in speech than i so send him with me as a helper to confirm and strengthen me for i fear that they may accuse me of falsehood.
he said we will certainly strengthen thy arm through thy brother and invest you both with authority so they shall not be able to touch you with our sign shall ye triumph you two as well as those who follow you.
when moses came to them with our clear signs they said this is nothing but sorcery faked up never did we head the like among our fathers of old
moses said my lord knows best who it is that comes with guidance from him and whose end will be best in the hereafter certain it is that the wrongdoers will not prosper.
pharaoh said o chiefs no god do i know for you but myself therefore o haman light me a kiln to bake bricks out of clay and build me a lofty palace that i may mount up to the god of moses but as far as i am concerned i think moses is a liar
and he was arrogant and insolent in the land beyond reason he and his hosts they thought that they would not have to return to us
so we seized him and his hosts and we flung them into the sea now behold what was the end of those who did wrong
and we made them but leaders inviting to the fire and on the day of judgment no help shall they find.
in this world we made a curse to follow them and on the day of judgment they will be among the loathed and despised.
we did reveal to moses the book after we had destroyed the earlier generations to give insight to men and guidance and mercy that they might receive admonition.
thou wast not on the western side when we decreed the commission to moses nor wast thou a witness of those events.
but we raised up new generations and long were the ages that passed over them but thou wast not a dweller among the people of madyan rehearsing our signs to them but it is we who send messengers with inspiration.
nor wast thou at the side of the mountain of tur when we called to moses. yet art thou sent as mercy from thy lord to give warning to a people to whom no warner had come before thee in order that they may receive admonition.
if we had not sent thee to the quraishname they might say our lord why didst thou not sent us a messenger we should then have followed thy signs and been amongst those who believe
but now when the truth has come to them from ourselves they say why are not signs sent to him like those which were sent to moses do they not then reject the signs which were formerly sent to moses they say two kinds of sorcery each assisting the other and they say for us we reject all such things
say then bring ye a book from allah which is a better guide than either of them that i may follow it do if ye are truthful
but if they hearken not to thee know that they only follow their own lusts and who is more astray than one who follow his own lusts devoid of guidance from allah for allah guides not people given to wrongdoing.
now have we caused the word to reach them themselves in order that they may receive admonition.
those to whom we sent the book before this they do believe in this revelation
and when it is recited to them they say we believe therein for it is the truth from our lord indeed we have been muslims bowing to allahxbs will from before this.
twice will they be given their reward for that they have persevered that they avert evil with good and that they spend in charity out of what we have given them.
and when they hear vain talk they turn away therefrom and say to us our deeds and to you yours peace be to you we seek not the ignorant.
it is true thou wilt not be able to guide every one whom thou lovest but allah guides those whom he will and he knows best those who receive guidance.
they say if we were to follow the guidance with thee we should be snatched away from our land. have we not established for them a secure sanctuary to which are brought as tribute fruits of all kindsname
and how many populations we destroyed which exulted in their life of ease and plenty now those habitations of theirs after them are deserted all but a miserable few and we are their heirs
nor was thy lord the one to destroy a population until he had sent to its centre a messenger rehearsing to them our signs nor are we going to destroy a population except when its members practise iniquity.
the material things which ye are given are but the conveniences of this life and the glitter thereof but that which is with allah is better and more enduring will ye not then be wise
are these two alike one to whom we have made a goodly promise and who is going to reach its fulfilment and one to whom we have given the good things of this life but who on the day of judgment is to be among those brought up for punishment
that day allah will call to them and say where are my xbpartnersxb whom ye imagined to be such
those against whom the charge will be proved will say our lord these are the ones whom we led astray we led them astray as we were astray ourselves we free ourselves from them in thy presence it was not us they worshipped.
it will be said to them call upon your xbpartnersxb for help they will call upon them but they will not listen to them and they will see the penalty before them how they will wish xbif only they had been open to guidancexb
that day allah will call to them and say what was the answer ye gave to the messengers
then the whole story that day will seem obscure to them like light to the blind and they will not be able even to question each other.
but any that in this life had repented believed and worked righteousness will have hopes to be among those who achieve salvation.
thy lord does create and choose as he pleases no choice have they in the matter glory to allah and far is he above the partners they ascribe to him
and thy lord knows all that their hearts conceal and all that they reveal.
and he is allah there is no god but he. to him be praise at the first and at the last for him is the command and to him shall ye all be brought back.
say see ye if allah were to make the night perpetual over you to the day of judgment what god is there other than allah who can give you enlightenment will ye not then hearken
say see ye if allah were to make the day perpetual over you to the day of judgment what god is there other than allah who can give you a night in which ye can rest will ye not then see
it is out of his mercy that he has made for you night and dayname and that ye may seek of his grace and in order that ye may be grateful.
the day that he will call on them he will say where are my xbpartnersxb whom ye imagined to be such
and from each people shall we draw a witness and we shall say produce your proof then shall they know that the truth is in allah alone and the lies which they invented will leave them in lurch.
qarun was doubtless of the people of moses but he acted insolently towards them such were the treasures we had bestowed on him that their very keys would have been a burden to a body of strong men behold his people said to him exult not for allah loveth not those who exult in riches.
but seek with the wealth which allah has bestowed on thee the home of the hereafter nor forget thy portion in this world but do thou good as allah has been good to thee and seek not occasions for mischief in the land for allah loves not those who do mischief.
he said this has been given to me because of a certain knowledge which i have. did he not know that allah had destroyed before him whole generationsname
so he went forth among his people in the pride of his wordly glitter. said those whose aim is the life of this world oh that we had the like of what qarun has got for he is truly a lord of mighty good fortune
but those who had been granted true knowledge said alas for you the reward of allah in the hereafter is best for those who believe and work righteousness but this none shall attain save those who steadfastly persevere in good.
then we caused the earth to swallow up him and his house and he had not the least little party to help him against allah nor could he defend himself.
and those who had envied his position the day before began to say on the morrow ah it is indeed allah who enlarges the provision or restricts it to any of his servants he pleases had it not been that allah was gracious to us he could have caused the earth to swallow us up ah those who reject allah will assuredly never prosper.
that home of the hereafter we shall give to those who intend not highhandedness or mischief on earth and the end is best for the righteous.
if any does good the reward to him is better than his deed but if any does evil the doers of evil are only punished to the extent of their deeds.
verily he who ordained the qurxban for thee will bring thee back to the place of return. say my lord knows best who it is that brings true guidance and who is in manifest error.
and thou hadst not expected that the book would be sent to thee except as a mercy from thy lord therefore lend not thou support in any way to those who reject allahxbs message.
and let nothing keep thee back from the signs of allah after they have been revealed to thee and invite men to thy lord and be not of the company of those who join gods with allah.
and call not besides allah on another god. there is no god but he. everything that exists will perish except his own face. to him belongs the command and to him will ye all be brought back.
a.l.m.
do men think that they will be left alone on saying we believe and that they will not be tested
we did test those before them and allah will certainly know those who are true from those who are false.
do those who practise evil think that they will get the better of us evil is their judgment
for those whose hopes are in the meeting with allah in the hereafter let them strive for the term appointed by allah is surely coming and he hears and knows all things.
and if any strive with might and main they do so for their own souls for allah is free of all needs from all creation.
those who believe and work righteous deedsname and we shall reward them according to the best of their deeds.
we have enjoined on man kindness to parents but if they either of them strive to force thee to join with me in worship anything of which thou hast no knowledge obey them not. ye have all to return to me and i will tell you the truth of all that ye did.
and those who believe and work righteous deedsname
then there are among men such as say we believe in allah but when they suffer affliction in the cause of allah they treat menxbs oppression as if it were the wrath of allah and if help comes to thee from thy lord they are sure to say we have always been with you does not allah know best all that is in the hearts of all creation
and allah most certainly knows those who believe and as certainly those who are hypocrites.
and the unbelievers say to those who believe follow our path and we will bear the consequences of your faults. never in the least will they bear their faults in fact they are liars
they will bear their own burdens and other burdens along with their own and on the day of judgments they will be called to account for their falsehoods.
we once sent noah to his people and he tarried among them a thousand years less fifty but the deluge overwhelmed them while they persisted in sin.
but we saved him and the companions of the ark and we made the ark a sign for all peoples
and we also saved abraham behold he said to his people serve allah and fear him that will be best for you if ye understand
for ye do worship idols besides allah and ye invent falsehood. the things that ye worship besides allah have no power to give you sustenance then seek ye sustenance from allah serve him and be grateful to him to him will be your return.
and if ye reject the message so did generations before you and the duty of the messenger is only to preach publicly and clearly.
see they not how allah originates creation then repeats it truly that is easy for allah.
say travel through the earth and see how allah did originate creation so will allah produce a later creation for allah has power over all things.
he punishes whom he pleases and he grants mercy to whom he pleases and towards him are ye turned.
not on earth nor in heaven will ye be able fleeing to frustrate his plan nor have ye besides allah any protector or helper.
those who reject the signs of allah and the meeting with him in the hereaftername
so naught was the answer of abrahamxbs people except that they said slay him or burn him. but allah did save him from the fire. verily in this are signs for people who believe.
and he said for you ye have taken for worship idols besides allah out of mutual love and regard between yourselves in this life but on the day of judgment ye shall disown each other and curse each other and your abode will be the fire and ye shall have none to help.
but lut had faith in him he said i will leave home for the sake of my lord for he is exalted in might and wise.
and we gave abraham isaac and jacob and ordained among his progeny prophethood and revelation and we granted him his reward in this life and he was in the hereafter of the company of the righteous.
and remember lut behold he said to his people ye do commit lewdness such as no people in creation ever committed before you.
do ye indeed approach men and cut off the highway and practise wickedness even in your councils but his people gave no answer but this they said bring us the wrath of allah if thou tellest the truth.
he said o my lord help thou me against people who do mischief
when our messengers came to abraham with the good news they said we are indeed going to destroy the people of this township for truly they are addicted to crime.
he said but there is lut there. they said well do we know who is there  we will certainly save him and his following except his wife she is of those who lag behind
and when our messengers came to lut he was grieved on their account and felt himself powerless to protect them but they said fear thou not nor grieve we are here to save thee and thy following except thy wife she is of those who lag behind.
for we are going to bring down on the people of this township a punishment from heaven because they have been wickedly rebellious.
and we have left thereof an evident sign for any people who care to understand.
to the madyan people we sent their brother shuxbaib. then he said o my people serve allah and fear the last day nor commit evil on the earth with intent to do mischief.
but they rejected him then the mighty blast seized them and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning.
remember also the xbad and the thamud people clearly will appear to you from the traces of their buildings their fate the evil one made their deeds alluring to them and kept them back from the path though they were gifted with intelligence and skill.
remember also qarun pharaoh and haman there came to them moses with clear signs but they behaved with insolence on the earth yet they could not overreach us.
each one of them we seized for his crime of them against some we sent a violent tornado with showers of stones some were caught by a mighty blast some we caused the earth to swallow up and some we drowned in the waters it was not allah who injured or oppressed them they injured and oppressed their own souls.
the parable of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider who builds to itself a house but truly the flimsiest of houses is the spiderxbs house if they but knew.
verily allah doth know of every thing whatever that they call upon besides him and he is exalted in power wise.
and such are the parables we set forth for mankind but only those understand them who have knowledge.
allah created the heavens and the earth in true proportions verily in that is a sign for those who believe.
recite what is sent of the book by inspiration to thee and establish regular prayer for prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds and remembrance of allah is the greatest thing in life without doubt. and allah knows the deeds that ye do.
and dispute ye not with the people of the book except with means better than mere disputation unless it be with those of them who inflict wrong and injury but say we believe in the revelation which has come down to us and in that which came down to you our allah and your allah is one and it is to him we bow in islam.
and thus it is that we have sent down the book to thee. so the people of the book believe therein as also do some of these pagan arabs and none but unbelievers reject our signs.
and thou wast not able to recite a book before this book came nor art thou able to transcribe it with thy right hand in that case indeed would the talkers of vanities have doubted.
nay here are signs selfevident in the hearts of those endowed with knowledge and none but the unjust reject our signs.
ye they say why are not signs sent down to him from his lord say the signs are indeed with allah and i am indeed a clear warner.
and is it not enough for them that we have sent down to thee the book which is rehearsed to them verily in it is mercy and a reminder to those who believe.
say enough is allah for a witness between me and you he knows what is in the heavens and on earth. and it is those who believe in vanities and reject allah that will perish in the end.
they ask thee to hasten on the punishment for them had it not been for a term of respite appointed the punishment would certainly have come to them and it will certainly reach themname while they perceive not
they ask thee to hasten on the punishment but of a surety hell will encompass the rejecters of faith
on the day that the punishment shall cover them from above them and from below them and a voice shall say taste ye the fruits of your deeds
o my servants who believe truly spacious is my earth therefore serve ye me  and me alone
every soul shall have a taste of death in the end to us shall ye be brought back.
but those who believe and work deeds of righteousness  to them shall we give a home in heavenname to dwell therein for aye an excellent reward for those who do good
those who persevere in patience and put their trust in their lord and cherisher.
how many are the creatures that carry not their own sustenance it is allah who feeds both them and you for he hears and knows all things.
if indeed thou ask them who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon to his law they will certainly reply allah. how are they then deluded away from the truth
allah enlarges the sustenance which he gives to whichever of his servants he pleases and he similarly grants by strict measure as he pleases for allah has full knowledge of all things.
and if indeed thou ask them who it is that sends down rain from the sky and gives life therewith to the earth after its death they will certainly reply allah say praise be to allah but most of them understand not.
what is the life of this world but amusement and play but verily the home in the hereaftername if they but knew.
now if they embark on a boat they call on allah making their devotion sincerely and exclusively to him but when he has delivered them safely to dry land behold they give a share of their worship to others
disdaining ungratefully our gifts and giving themselves up to worldly enjoyment but soon will they know.
do they not then see that we have made a sanctuary secure and that men are being snatched away from all around them then do they believe in that which is vain and reject the grace of allah
and who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or rejects the truth when it reaches him is there not a home in hell for those who reject faith
and those who strive in our causename
a. l. m.
the roman empire has been defeated
in a land close by but they even after this defeat of theirs will soon be victorious
within a few years. with allah is the decision in the past and in the future on that day shall the believers rejoice
with the help of allah. he helps whom he will and he is exalted in might most merciful.
it is the promise of allah. never does allah depart from his promise but most men understand not.
they know but the outer things in the life of this world but of the end of things they are heedless.
do they not reflect in their own minds not but for just ends and for a term appointed did allah create the heavens and the earth and all between them yet are there truly many among men who deny the meeting with their lord at the resurrection
do they not travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before them they were superior to them in strength they tilled the soil and populated it in greater numbers than these have done there came to them their messengers with clear signs. which they rejected to their own destruction it was not allah who wronged them but they wronged their own souls.
in the long run evil in the extreme will be the end of those who do evil for that they rejected the signs of allah and held them up to ridicule.
it is allah who begins the process of creation then repeats it then shall ye be brought back to him.
on the day that the hour will be established the guilty will be struck dumb with despair.
no intercessor will they have among their partners and they will themselves reject their partners.
on the day that the hour will be establishedname
then those who have believed and worked righteous deeds shall be made happy in a mead of delight.
and those who have rejected faith and falsely denied our signs and the meeting of the hereaftername
so give glory to allah when ye reach eventide and when ye rise in the morning
yea to him be praise in the heavens and on earth and in the late afternoon and when the day begins to decline.
it is he who brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living and who gives life to the earth after it is dead and thus shall ye be brought out from the dead.
among his signs in this that he created you from dust and thenname ye are men scattered far and wide
and among his signs is this that he created for you mates from among yourselves that ye may dwell in tranquillity with them and he has put love and mercy between your hearts verily in that are signs for those who reflect.
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the variations in your languages and your colours verily in that are signs for those who know.
and among his signs is the sleep that ye take by night and by day and the quest that ye make for livelihood out of his bounty verily in that are signs for those who hearken.
and among his signs he shows you the lightning by way both of fear and of hope and he sends down rain from the sky and with it gives life to the earth after it is dead verily in that are signs for those who are wise.
and among his signs is this that heaven and earth stand by his command then when he calls you by a single call from the earth behold ye straightway come forth.
to him belongs every being that is in the heavens and on earth all are devoutly obedient to him.
it is he who begins the process of creation then repeats it and for him it is most easy. to him belongs the loftiest similitude we can think of in the heavens and the earth for he is exalted in might full of wisdom.
he does propound to you a similitude from your own experience do ye have partners among those whom your right hands possess to share as equals in the wealth we have bestowed on you do ye fear them as ye fear each other thus do we explain the signs in detail to a people that understand.
nay the wrongdoers merely follow their own lusts being devoid of knowledge. but who will guide those whom allah leaves astray to them there will be no helpers.
so set thou thy face steadily and truly to the faith establish allahxbs handiwork according to the pattern on which he has made mankind no change let there be in the work wrought by allah that is the standard religion but most among mankind understand not.
turn ye back in repentance to him and fear him establish regular prayers and be not ye among those who join gods with allah
those who split up their religion and become mere sects each party rejoicing in that which is with itself
when trouble touches men they cry to their lord turning back to him in repentance but when he gives them a taste of mercy as from himself behold some of them pay partworship to other godxbs besides their lord
as if to show their ingratitude for the favours we have bestowed on them then enjoy your brief day but soon will ye know your folly.
or have we sent down authority to them which points out to them the things to which they pay partworship
when we give men a taste of mercy they exult thereat and when some evil afflicts them because of what their own hands have sent forth behold they are in despair
see they not that allah enlarges the provision and restricts it to whomsoever he pleases verily in that are signs for those who believe.
so give what is due to kindred the needy and the wayfarer. that is best for those who seek the countenance of allah and it is they who will prosper.
that which ye lay out for increase through the property of other people will have no increase with allah but that which ye lay out for charity seeking the countenance of allah will increase it is these who will get a recompense multiplied.
it is allah who has created you further he has provided for your sustenance then he will cause you to die and again he will give you life. are there any of your false partners who can do any single one of these things glory to him and high is he above the partners they attribute to him
mischief has appeared on land and sea because of the meed that the hands of men have earned that allah may give them a taste of some of their deeds in order that they may turn back from evil.
say travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before you most of them worshipped others besides allah.
but set thou thy face to the right religion before there come from allah the day which there is no chance of averting on that day shall men be divided in two.
those who reject faith will suffer from that rejection and those who work righteousness will spread their couch of repose for themselves in heaven
that he may reward those who believe and work righteous deeds out of his bounty. for he loves not those who reject faith.
among his signs is this that he sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings giving you a taste of his grace and mercyname
we did indeed send before thee messengers to their respective peoples and they came to them with clear signs then to those who transgressed we meted out retribution and it was due from us to aid those who believed.
it is allah who sends the winds and they raise the clouds then does he spread them in the sky as he wills and break them into fragments until thou seest raindrops issue from the midst thereof then when he has made them reach such of his servants as he wills behold they do rejoice
even though before they received the rain  just before this  they were dumb with despair
then contemplate o man the memorials of allahxbs mercy how he gives life to the earth after its death verily the same will give life to the men who are dead for he has power over all things.
and if we but send a wind from which they see their tilth turn yellowname they become thereafter ungrateful unbelievers
so verily thou canst not make the dead to hear nor canst thou make the deaf to hear the call when they show their backs and turn away.
nor canst thou lead back the blind from their straying only those wilt thou make to hear who believe in our signs and submit their wills in islam.
it is allah who created you in a state of helpless weakness then gave you strength after weakness then after strength gave you weakness and a hoary head he creates as he wills and it is he who has all knowledge and power.
on the day that the hour of reckoning will be established the transgressors will swear that they tarried not but an hour thus were they used to being deluded
but those endued with knowledge and faith will say indeed ye did tarry within allahxbs decree to the day of resurrection and this is the day of resurrection but ye  ye were not aware
so on that day no excuse of theirs will avail the transgressors nor will they be invited then to seek grace by repentance.
verily we have propounded for men in this qurxban every kind of parable but if thou bring to them any sign the unbelievers are sure to say ye do nothing but talk vanities.
thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who understand not.
so patiently persevere for verily the promise of allah is true nor let those shake thy firmness who have themselves no certainty of faith.
a. l. m.
these are verses of the wise book
a guide and a mercy to the doers of good
those who establish regular prayer and give regular charity and have in their hearts the assurance of the hereafter.
these are on true guidance from their lord and these are the ones who will prosper.
but there are among men those who purchase idle tales without knowledge or meaning to mislead men from the path of allah and throw ridicule on the path for such there will be a humiliating penalty.
when our signs are rehearsed to such a one he turns away in arrogance as if he heard them not as if there were deafness in both his ears announce to him a grievous penalty.
for those who believe and work righteous deeds there will be gardens of bliss
to dwell therein. the promise of allah is true and he is exalted in power wise.
he created the heavens without any pillars that ye can see he set on the earth mountains standing firm lest it should shake with you and he scattered through it beasts of all kinds. we send down rain from the sky and produce on the earth every kind of noble creature in pairs.
such is the creation of allah now show me what is there that others besides him have created nay but the transgressors are in manifest error.
we bestowed in the past wisdom on luqman show thy gratitude to allah. any who is so grateful does so to the profit of his own soul but if any is ungrateful verily allah is free of all wants worthy of all praise.
behold luqman said to his son by way of instruction o my son join not in worship others with allah for false worship is indeed the highest wrongdoing.
and we have enjoined on man to be good to his parents in travail upon travail did his mother bear him and in years twain was his weaning hear the command show gratitude to me and to thy parents to me is thy final goal.
but if they strive to make thee join in worship with me things of which thou hast no knowledge obey them not yet bear them company in this life with justice and consideration and follow the way of those who turn to me in love in the end the return of you all is to me and i will tell you the truth and meaning of all that ye did.
o my son said luqman if there be but the weight of a mustardseed and it were hidden in a rock or anywhere in the heavens or on earth allah will bring it forth for allah understands the finest mysteries and is wellacquainted with them.
o my son establish regular prayer enjoin what is just and forbid what is wrong and bear with patient constancy whatever betide thee for this is firmness of purpose in the conduct of affairs.
and swell not thy cheek for pride at men nor walk in insolence through the earth for allah loveth not any arrogant boaster.
and be moderate in thy pace and lower thy voice for the harshest of sounds without doubt is the braying of the ass.
do ye not see that allah has subjected to your use all things in the heavens and on earth and has made his bounties flow to you in exceeding measure both seen and unseen yet there are among men those who dispute about allah without knowledge and without guidance and without a book to enlighten them
when they are told to follow the revelation that allah has sent down they say nay we shall follow the ways that we found our fathers following. what even if it is satan beckoning them to the penalty of the blazing fire
whoever submits his whole self to allah and is a doer of good has grasped indeed the most trustworthy handhold and with allah rests the end and decision of all affairs.
but if any reject faith let not his rejection grieve thee to us is their return and we shall tell them the truth of their deeds for allah knows well all that is in menxbs hearts.
we grant them their pleasure for a little while in the end shall we drive them to a chastisement unrelenting.
if thou ask them who it is that created the heavens and the earth. they will certainly say allah. say praise be to allah but most of them understand not.
to allah belong all things in heaven and earth verily allah is he that is free of all wants worthy of all praise.
and if all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean were ink with seven oceans behind it to add to its supply yet would not the words of allah be exhausted in the writing for allah is exalted in power full of wisdom.
and your creation or your resurrection is in no wise but as an individual soul for allah is he who hears and sees all things.
seest thou not that allah merges night into day and he merges day into night that he has subjected the sun and the moon to his law each running its course for a term appointed and that allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do
that is because allah is the only reality and because whatever else they invoke besides him is falsehood and because allahname most great.
seest thou not that the ships sail through the ocean by the grace of allah that he may show you of his signs verily in this are signs for all who constantly persevere and give thanks.
when a wave covers them like the canopy of clouds they call to allah offering him sincere devotion. but when he has delivered them safely to land there are among them those that halt between right and wrong. but none reject our signs except only a perfidious ungrateful wretch
o mankind do your duty to your lord and fear the coming of a day when no father can avail aught for his son nor a son avail aught for his father. verily the promise of allah is true let not then this present life deceive you nor let the chief deceiver deceive you about allah.
verily the knowledge of the hour is with allah alone. it is he who sends down rain and he who knows what is in the wombs. nor does any one know what it is that he will earn on the morrow nor does any one know in what land he is to die. verily with allah is full knowledge and he is acquainted with all things.
a. l. m.
this is the revelation of the book in which there is no doubtname
or do they say he has forged it nay it is the truth from thy lord that thou mayest admonish a people to whom no warner has come before thee in order that they may receive guidance.
it is allah who has created the heavens and the earth and all between them in six days and is firmly established on the throne of authority ye have none besides him to protect or intercede for you will ye not then receive admonition
he rules all affairs from the heavens to the earth in the end will all affairs go up to him on a day the space whereof will be as a thousand years of your reckoning.
such is he the knower of all things hidden and open the exalted in power the merciful
he who has made everything which he has created most good he began the creation of man with nothing more than clay
and made his progeny from a quintessence of the nature of a fluid despised
but he fashioned him in due proportion and breathed into him something of his spirit. and he gave you the faculties of hearing and sight and feeling and understanding little thanks do ye give
and they say what when we lie hidden and lost in the earth shall we indeed be in a creation renewed nay they deny the meeting with their lord.
say the angel of death put in charge of you will duly take your souls then shall ye be brought back to your lord.
if only thou couldst see when the guilty ones will bend low their heads before their lord saying our lord we have seen and we have heard now then send us back to the world we will work righteousness for we do indeed now believe.
if we had so willed we could certainly have brought every soul its true guidance but the word from me will come true i will fill hell with jinns and men all together.
taste ye then  for ye forgot the meeting of this day of yours and we too will forget you  taste ye the penalty of eternity for your evil deeds
only those believe in our signs who when they are recited to them fall down in prostration and celebrate the praises of their lord nor are they ever puffed up with pride.
their limbs do forsake their beds of sleep the while they call on their lord in fear and hope and they spend in charity out of the sustenance which we have bestowed on them.
now no person knows what delights of the eye are kept hidden in reserve for them  as a reward for their good deeds.
is then the man who believes no better than the man who is rebellious and wicked not equal are they.
for those who believe and do righteous deeds are gardens as hospitable homes for their good deeds.
as to those who are rebellious and wicked their abode will be the fire every time they wish to get away therefrom they will be forced thereinto and it will be said to them taste ye the penalty of the fire the which ye were wont to reject as false.
and indeed we will make them taste of the penalty of this life prior to the supreme penalty in order that they may repent and return.
and who does more wrong than one to whom are recited the signs of his lord and who then turns away therefrom verily from those who transgress we shall exact due retribution.
we did indeed aforetime give the book to moses be not then in doubt of its reaching thee and we made it a guide to the children of israel.
and we appointed from among them leaders giving guidance under our command so long as they persevered with patience and continued to have faith in our signs.
verily thy lord will judge between them on the day of judgment in the matters wherein they differ among themselves
does it not teach them a lesson how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they now go to and fro verily in that are signs do they not then listen
and do they not see that we do drive rain to parched soil bare of herbage and produce therewith crops providing food for their cattle and themselves have they not the vision
they say when will this decision be if ye are telling the truth
say on the day of decision no profit will it be to unbelievers if they then believe nor will they be granted a respite.
so turn away from them and wait they too are waiting.
o prophet fear allah and hearken not to the unbelievers and the hypocrites verily allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
but follow that which comes to thee by inspiration from thy lord for allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.
and put thy trust in allah and enough is allah as a disposer of affairs.
allah has not made for any man two hearts in his one body nor has he made your wives whom ye divorce by zihar your mothers nor has he made your adopted sons your sons. such is only your manner of speech by your mouths. but allah tells you the truth and he shows the right way.
call them by the names of their fathers that is juster in the sight of allah. but if ye know not their fatherxbs names call them your brothers in faith or your maulas. but there is no blame on you if ye make a mistake therein what counts is the intention of your hearts and allah is oftreturning most merciful.
the prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves and his wives are their mothers. bloodrelations among each other have closer personal ties in the decree of allah. than the brotherhood of believers and muhajirs nevertheless do ye what is just to your closest friends such is the writing in the decree of allah.
and remember we took from the prophets their covenant as we did from thee from noah abraham moses and jesus the son of mary we took from them a solemn covenant
that allah may question the custodians of truth concerning the truth they were charged with and he has prepared for the unbelievers a grievous penalty.
o ye who believe remember the grace of allah bestowed on you when there came down on you hosts to overwhelm you but we sent against them a hurricane and forces that ye saw not but allah sees clearly all that ye do.
behold they came on you from above you and from below you and behold the eyes became dim and the hearts gaped up to the throats and ye imagined various vain thoughts about allah
in that situation were the believers tried they were shaken as by a tremendous shaking.
and behold the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease even say allah and his messenger promised us nothing but delusion
behold a party among them said ye men of yathrib ye cannot stand the attack therefore go back and a band of them ask for leave of the prophet saying truly our houses are bare and exposed though they were not exposed they intended nothing but to run away.
and if an entry had been effected to them from the sides of the city and they had been incited to sedition they would certainly have brought it to pass with none but a brief delay
and yet they had already covenanted with allah not to turn their backs and a covenant with allah must surely be answered for.
say running away will not profit you if ye are running away from death or slaughter and even if ye do escape no more than a brief respite will ye be allowed to enjoy
say who is it that can screen you from allah if it be his wish to give you punishment or to give you mercy nor will they find for themselves besides allah any protector or helper.
verily allah knows those among you who keep back men and those who say to their brethren come along to us but come not to the fight except for just a little while.
covetous over you. then when fear comes thou wilt see them looking to thee their eyes revolving like those of one over whom hovers death but when the fear is past they will smite you with sharp tongues covetous of goods. such men have no faith and so allah has made their deeds of none effect and that is easy for allah.
they think that the confederates have not withdrawn and if the confederates should come again they would wish they were in the deserts wandering among the bedouins and seeking news about you from a safe distance and if they were in your midst they would fight but little.
ye have indeed in the messenger of allah a beautiful pattern of conduct for any one whose hope is in allah and the final day and who engages much in the praise of allah.
when the believers saw the confederate forces they said this is what allah and his messenger had promised us and allah and his messenger told us what was true. and it only added to their faith and their zeal in obedience.
among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with allah of them some have completed their vow to the extreme and some still wait but they have never changed their determination in the least
that allah may reward the men of truth for their truth and punish the hypocrites if that be his will or turn to them in mercy for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
and allah turned back the unbelievers for all their fury no advantage did they gain and enough is allah for the believers in their fight. and allah is full of strength able to enforce his will.
and those of the people of the book who aided them  allah did take them down from their strongholds and cast terror into their hearts. so that some ye slew and some ye made prisoners.
and he made you heirs of their lands their houses and their goods and of a land which ye had not frequented before. and allah has power over all things.
o prophet say to thy consorts if it be that ye desire the life of this world and its glittername
but if ye seek allah and his messenger and the home of the hereafter verily allah has prepared for the welldoers amongst you a great reward.
o consorts of the prophet if any of you were guilty of evident unseemly conduct the punishment would be doubled to her and that is easy for allah.
but any of you that is devout in the service of allah and his messenger and works righteousnessname
o consorts of the prophet ye are not like any of the other women if ye do fear allah be not too complacent of speech lest one in whose heart is a disease should be moved with desire but speak ye a speech that is just.
and stay quietly in your houses and make not a dazzling display like that of the former times of ignorance and establish regular prayer and give regular charity and obey allah and his messenger. and allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you ye members of the family and to make you pure and spotless.
and recite what is rehearsed to you in your homes of the signs of allah and his wisdom for allah understands the finest mysteries and is wellacquainted with them.
for muslim men and womenname for devout men and women for true men and women for men and women who are patient and constant for men and women who humble themselves for men and women who give in charity for men and women who fast and deny themselves for men and women who guard their chastity and for men and women who engage much in allahxbs praisename
it is not fitting for a believer man or woman when a matter has been decided by allah and his messenger to have any option about their decision if any one disobeys allah and his messenger he is indeed on a clearly wrong path.
behold thou didst say to one who had received the grace of allah and thy favour retain thou in wedlock thy wife and fear allah. but thou didst hide in thy heart that which allah was about to make manifest thou didst fear the people but it is more fitting that thou shouldst fear allah. then when zaid had dissolved his marriage with her with the necessary formality we joined her in marriage to thee in order that in future there may be no difficulty to the believers in the matter of marriage with the wives of their adopted sons when the latter have dissolved with the necessary formality their marriage with them. and allahxbs command must be fulfilled.
there can be no difficulty to the prophet in what allah has indicated to him as a duty. it was the practice approved of allah amongst those of old that have passed away. and the command of allah is a decree determined.
it is the practice of those who preach the messages of allah and fear him and fear none but allah. and enough is allah to call men to account.
muhammad is not the father of any of your men but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets and allah has full knowledge of all things.
o ye who believe celebrate the praises of allah and do this often
and glorify him morning and evening.
he it is who sends blessings on you as do his angels that he may bring you out from the depths of darkness into light and he is full of mercy to the believers.
their salutation on the day they meet him will be peace and he has prepared for them a generous reward.
o prophet truly we have sent thee as a witness a bearer of glad tidings and warner
and as one who invites to allahxbs grace by his leave and as a lamp spreading light.
then give the glad tidings to the believers that they shall have from allah a very great bounty.
and obey not the behests of the unbelievers and the hypocrites and heed not their annoyances but put thy trust in allah. for enough is allah as a disposer of affairs.
o ye who believe when ye marry believing women and then divorce them before ye have touched them no period of xbiddat have ye to count in respect of them so give them a present. and set them free in a handsome manner.
o prophet we have made lawful to thee thy wives to whom thou hast paid their dowers and those whom thy right hand possesses out of the prisoners of war whom allah has assigned to thee and daughters of thy paternal uncles and aunts and daughters of thy maternal uncles and aunts who migrated from makka with thee and any believing woman who dedicates her soul to the prophet if the prophet wishes to wed her this only for thee and not for the believers at large we know what we have appointed for them as to their wives and the captives whom their right hands possess in order that there should be no difficulty for thee. and allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
thou mayest defer the turn of any of them that thou pleasest and thou mayest receive any thou pleasest and there is no blame on thee if thou invite one whose turn thou hadst set aside. this were nigher to the cooling of their eyes the prevention of their grief and their satisfaction  that of all of them  with that which thou hast to give them and allah knows all that is in your hearts and allah is allknowing most forbearing.
it is not lawful for thee to marry more women after this nor to change them for other wives even though their beauty attract thee except any thy right hand should possess as handmaidens and allah doth watch over all things.
o ye who believe enter not the prophetxbs housesnamename and then not so early as to wait for its preparation but when ye are invited enter and when ye have taken your meal disperse without seeking familiar talk. such behaviour annoys the prophet he is ashamed to dismiss you but allah is not ashamed to tell you the truth. and when ye ask his ladies for anything ye want ask them from before a screen that makes for greater purity for your hearts and for theirs. nor is it right for you that ye should annoy allahxbs messenger or that ye should marry his widows after him at any time. truly such a thing is in allahxbs sight an enormity.
whether ye reveal anything or conceal it verily allah has full knowledge of all things.
there is no blame on these ladies if they appear before their fathers or their sons their brothers or their brotherxbs sons or their sistersxb sons or their women or the slaves whom their right hands possess. and ladies fear allah for allah is witness to all things.
allah and his angels send blessings on the prophet o ye that believe send ye blessings on him and salute him with all respect.
those who annoy allah and his messenger  allah has cursed them in this world and in the hereafter and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment.
and those who annoy believing men and women undeservedly bear on themselves a calumny and a glaring sin.
o prophet tell thy wives and daughters and the believing women that they should cast their outer garments over their persons when abroad that is most convenient that they should be known as such and not molested. and allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
truly if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and those who stir up sedition in the city desist not we shall certainly stir thee up against them then will they not be able to stay in it as thy neighbours for any length of time
they shall have a curse on them whenever they are found they shall be seized and slain without mercy.
such was the practice approved of allah among those who lived aforetime no change wilt thou find in the practice approved of allah.
men ask thee concerning the hour say the knowledge thereof is with allah alone and what will make thee understand perchance the hour is nigh
verily allah has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blazing fire
to dwell therein for ever no protector will they find nor helper.
the day that their faces will be turned upside down in the fire they will say woe to us would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger
and they would say our lord we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones and they misled us as to the right path.
our lord give them double penalty and curse them with a very great curse
o ye who believe be ye not like those who vexed and insulted moses but allah cleared him of the calumnies they had uttered and he was honourable in allahxbs sight.
o ye who believe fear allah and always say a word directed to the right
that he may make your conduct whole and sound and forgive you your sins he that obeys allah and his messenger has already attained the highest achievement.
we did indeed offer the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains but they refused to undertake it being afraid thereof but man undertook it he was indeed unjust and foolish
with the result that allah has to punish the hypocrites men and women and the unbelievers men and women and allah turns in mercy to the believers men and women for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
praise be to allah to whom belong all things in the heavens and on earth to him be praise in the hereafter and he is full of wisdom acquainted with all things.
he knows all that goes into the earth and all that comes out thereof all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends thereto and he is the most merciful the oftforgiving.
the unbelievers say never to us will come the hour say nay but most surely by my lord it will come upon you by him who knows the unseenname or greater but is in the record perspicuous
that he may reward those who believe and work deeds of righteousness for such is forgiveness and a sustenance most generous.
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate themnamename
and those to whom knowledge has come see that the revelation sent down to thee from thy lord  that is the truth and that it guides to the path of the exalted in might worthy of all praise.
the unbelievers say in ridicule shall we point out to you a man that will tell you when ye are all scattered to pieces in disintegration that ye shall then be raised in a new creation
has he invented a falsehood against allah or has a spirit seized him nay it is those who believe not in the hereafter that are in real penalty and in farthest error.
see they not what is before them and behind them of the sky and the earth if we wished we could cause the earth to swallow them up or cause a piece of the sky to fall upon them. verily in this is a sign for every devotee that turns to allah in repentance.
we bestowed grace aforetime on david from ourselves o ye mountains sing ye back the praises of allah with him and ye birds also and we made the iron soft for him
commanding make thou coast of mail balancing well the rings of chain armour and work ye righteousness for be sure i see clearly all that ye do.
and to solomon we made the wind obedient its early morning stride was a monthxbs journey and its evening stride was a monthxbs journey and we made a font of molten brass to flow for him and there were jinns that worked in front of him by the leave of his lord and if any of them turned aside from our command we made him taste of the penalty of the blazing fire.
they worked for him as he desired making arches images basons as large as reservoirs and cooking cauldrons fixed in their places work ye sons of david with thanks but few of my servants are grateful
then when we decreed solomonxbs death nothing showed them his death except a little worm of the earth which kept slowly gnawing away at his staff so when he fell down the jinns saw plainly that if they had known the unseen they would not have tarried in the humiliating penalty of their task.
there was for saba aforetime a sign in their homeland  two gardens to the right and to the left. eat of the sustenance provided by your lord and be grateful to him a territory fair and happy and a lord oftforgiving
but they turned away from allah and we sent against them the flood released from the dams and we converted their two garden rows into gardens producing bitter fruit and tamarisks and some few stunted lotetrees.
that was the requital we gave them because they ungratefully rejected faith and never do we give such requital except to such as are ungrateful rejecters.
between them and the cities on which we had poured our blessings we had placed cities in prominent positions and between them we had appointed stages of journey in due proportion travel therein secure by night and by day.
but they said our lord place longer distances between our journeystages but they wronged themselves therein. at length we made them as a tale that is told and we dispersed them all in scattered fragments. verily in this are signs for every soul that is patiently constant and grateful.
and on them did satan prove true his idea and they followed him all but a party that believed.
but he had no authority over themname
say call upon other gods whom ye fancy besides allah they have no powernamename nor is any of them a helper to allah.
no intercession can avail in his presence except for those for whom he has granted permission. so far is this the case that when terror is removed from their hearts at the day of judgment then will they say xbwhat is it that your lord commandedxb they will say xbthat which is true and just and he is the most high most greatxb.
say who gives you sustenance from the heavens and the earth say it is allah and certain it is that either we or ye are on right guidance or in manifest error
say ye shall not be questioned as to our sins nor shall we be questioned as to what ye do.
say our lord will gather us together and will in the end decide the matter between us and you in truth and justice and he is the one to decide the one who knows all.
say show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners by no means can ye. nay he is allah the exalted in power the wise.
we have not sent thee but as a universal messenger to men giving them glad tidings and warning them against sin but most men understand not.
they say when will this promise come to pass if ye are telling the truth
say the appointment to you is for a day which ye cannot put back for an hour nor put forward.
the unbelievers say we shall neither believe in this scripture nor in any that came before it. couldst thou but see when the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their lord throwing back the word of blame on one another those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones had it not been for you we should certainly have been believers
the arrogant ones will say to those who had been despised was it we who kept you back from guidance after it reached you nay rather it was ye who transgressed.
those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones nay it was a plot of yours by day and by night behold ye constantly ordered us to be ungrateful to allah and to attribute equals to him they will declare their repentance when they see the penalty we shall put yokes on the necks of the unbelievers it would only be a requital for their ill deeds.
never did we send a warner to a population but the wealthy ones among them said we believe not in the message with which ye have been sent.
they said we have more in wealth and in sons and we cannot be punished.
say verily my lord enlarges and restricts the provision to whom he pleases but most men understand not.
it is not your wealth nor your sons that will bring you nearer to us in degree but only those who believe and work righteousness  these are the ones for whom there is a multiplied reward for their deeds while secure they reside in the dwellings on high
those who strive against our signs to frustrate them will be given over into punishment.
say verily my lord enlarges and restricts the sustenance to such of his servants as he pleases and nothing do ye spend in the least in his cause but he replaces it for he is the best of those who grant sustenance.
one day he will gather them all together and say to the angels was it you that these men used to worship
they will say glory to thee our tie is with thee  as protector  not with them. nay but they worshipped the jinns most of them believed in them.
so on that day no power shall they have over each other for profit or harm and we shall say to the wrongdoers taste ye the penalty of the fire the which ye were wont to deny
when our clear signs are rehearsed to them they say this is only a man who wishes to hinder you from the worship which your fathers practised. and they say this is only a falsehood invented and the unbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them this is nothing but evident magic
but we had not given them books which they could study nor sent messengers to them before thee as warners.
and their predecessors rejected the truth these have not received a tenth of what we had granted to those yet when they rejected my messengers how terrible was my rejection of them
say i do admonish you on one point that ye do stand up before allahname or it may be singlyname in face of a terrible penalty.
say no reward do i ask of you it is all in your interest my reward is only due from allah and he is witness to all things.
say verily my lord doth cast the mantle of truth over his servants he that has full knowledge of all that is hidden.
say the truth has arrived and falsehood neither creates anything new nor restores anything.
say if i am astray i only stray to the loss of my own soul but if i receive guidance it is because of the inspiration of my lord to me it is he who hears all things and is ever near.
if thou couldst but see when they will quake with terror but then there will be no escape for them and they will be seized from a position quite near.
and they will say we do believe now in the truth but how could they receive faith from a position so far off
seeing that they did reject faith entirely before and that they continually cast slanders on the unseen from a position far off
and between them and their desires is placed a barrier as was done in the past with their partisans for they were indeed in suspicious disquieting doubt.
praise be to allah who created out of nothing the heavens and the earth who made the angels messengers with wingsname or three or four pairs he adds to creation as he pleases for allah has power over all things.
what allah out of his mercy doth bestow on mankind there is none can withhold what he doth withhold there is none can grant apart from him and he is the exalted in power full of wisdom.
o men call to mind the grace of allah unto you is there a creator other than allah to give you sustenance from heaven or earth there is no god but he how then are ye deluded away from the truth
and if they reject thee so were messengers rejected before thee to allah back for decision all affairs.
o men certainly the promise of allah is true. let not then this present life deceive you nor let the chief deceiver deceive you about allah.
verily satan is an enemy to you so treat him as an enemy. he only invites his adherents that they may become companions of the blazing fire.
for those who reject allah is a terrible penalty but for those who believe and work righteous deeds is forgiveness and a magnificent reward.
is he then to whom the evil of his conduct is made alluring so that he looks upon it as good equal to one who is rightly guided for allah leaves to stray whom he wills and guides whom he wills. so let not thy soul go out in vainly sighing after them for allah knows well all that they do
it is allah who sends forth the winds so that they raise up the clouds and we drive them to a land that is dead and revive the earth therewith after its death even so will be the resurrection
if any do seek for glory and powername for them is a penalty terrible and the plotting of such will be void of result.
and allah did create you from dust then from a spermdrop then he made you in pairs. and no female conceives or lays down her load but with his knowledge. nor is a man longlived granted length of days nor is a part cut off from his life but is in a decree ordained. all this is easy to allah.
nor are the two bodies of flowing water alikename sweet and pleasant to drink and the other salt and bitter. yet from each kind of water do ye eat flesh fresh and tender and ye extract ornaments to wear and thou seest the ships therein that plough the waves that ye may seek thus of the bounty of allah that ye may be grateful.
he merges night into day and he merges day into night and he has subjected the sun and the moon to his law each one runs its course for a term appointed. such is allah your lord to him belongs all dominion. and those whom ye invoke besides him have not the least power.
if ye invoke them they will not listen to your call and if they were to listen they cannot answer your prayer. on the day of judgment they will reject your partnership. and none o man can tell thee the truth like the one who is acquainted with all things.
o ye men it is ye that have need of allah but allah is the one free of all wants worthy of all praise.
if he so pleased he could blot you out and bring in a new creation.
nor is that at all difficult for allah.
nor can a bearer of burdens bear anotherxbs burdens if one heavily laden should call another to bear his load. not the least portion of it can be carried by the other. even though he be nearly related. thou canst but admonish such as fear their lord unseen and establish regular prayer. and whoever purifies himself does so for the benefit of his own soul and the destination of all is to allah.
the blind and the seeing are not alike
nor are the depths of darkness and the light
nor are the chilly shade and the genial heat of the sun
nor are alike those that are living and those that are dead. allah can make any that he wills to hear but thou canst not make those to hear who are buried in graves.
thou art no other than a warner.
verily we have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner and there never was a people without a warner having lived among them in the past.
and if they reject thee so did their predecessors to whom came their messengers with clear signs books of dark prophecies and the book of enlightenment.
in the end did i punish those who rejected faith and how terrible was my rejection of them
seest thou not that allah sends down rain from the sky with it we then bring out produce of various colours. and in the mountains are tracts white and red of various shades of colour and black intense in hue.
and so amongst men and crawling creatures and cattle are they of various colours. those truly fear allah among his servants who have knowledge for allah is exalted in might oftforgiving.
those who rehearse the book of allah establish regular prayer and spend in charity out of what we have provided for them secretly and openly hope for a commerce that will never fail
for he will pay them their meed nay he will give them even more out of his bounty for he is oftforgiving most ready to appreciate service.
that which we have revealed to thee of the book is the truthname
then we have given the book for inheritance to such of our servants as we have chosen but there are among them some who wrong their own souls some who follow a middle course and some who are by allahxbs leave foremost in good deeds that is the highest grace.
gardens of eternity will they enter therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls and their garments there will be of silk.
and they will say praise be to allah who has removed from us all sorrow for our lord is indeed oftforgiving ready to appreciate service
who has out of his bounty settled us in a home that will last no toil nor sense of weariness shall touch us therein.
but those who reject allah  for them will be the fire of hell no term shall be determined for them so they should die nor shall its penalty be lightened for them. thus do we reward every ungrateful one
therein will they cry aloud for assistance our lord bring us out we shall work righteousness not the deeds we used to do  did we not give you long enough life so that he that would should receive admonition and moreover the warner came to you. so taste ye the fruits of your deeds for the wrongdoers there is no helper.
verily allah knows all the hidden things of the heavens and the earth verily he has full knowledge of all that is in menxbs hearts.
he it is that has made you inheritors in the earth if then any do reject allah their rejection works against themselves their rejection but adds to the odium for the unbelievers in the sight of their lord their rejection but adds to their own undoing.
say have ye seen these xbpartnersxb of yours whom ye call upon besides allah show me what it is they have created in the wide earth. or have they a share in the heavens or have we given them a book from which they can derive clear evidence nay the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusions.
it is allah who sustains the heavens and the earth lest they cease to function and if they should fail there is none  not one  can sustain them thereafter verily he is most forbearing oftforgiving.
they swore their strongest oaths by allah that if a warner came to them they would follow his guidance better than any other of the peoples but when a warner came to them it has only increased their flight from righteousness
on account of their arrogance in the land and their plotting of evil but the plotting of evil will hem in only the authors thereof. now are they but looking for the way the ancients were dealt with but no change wilt thou find in allahxbs way of dealing no turning off wilt thou find in allahxbs way of dealing.
do they not travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before themname
if allah were to punish men according to what they deserve. he would not leave on the back of the earth a single living creature but he gives them respite for a stated term when their term expires verily allah has in his sight all his servants.
ya sin.
by the qurxban full of wisdom
thou art indeed one of the messengers
on a straight way.
it is a revelation sent down by him the exalted in might most merciful.
in order that thou mayest admonish a people whose fathers had received no admonition and who therefore remain heedless of the signs of allah.
the word is proved true against the greater part of them for they do not believe.
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins so that their heads are forced up and they cannot see.
and we have put a bar in front of them and a bar behind them and further we have covered them up so that they cannot see.
the same is it to them whether thou admonish them or thou do not admonish them they will not believe.
thou canst but admonish such a one as follows the message and fears the lord most gracious unseen give such a one therefore good tidings of forgiveness and a reward most generous.
verily we shall give life to the dead and we record that which they send before and that which they leave behind and of all things have we taken account in a clear book of evidence.
set forth to them by way of a parable the story of the companions of the city. behold there came messengers to it.
when we first sent to them two messengers they rejected them but we strengthened them with a third they said truly we have been sent on a mission to you.
the people said ye are only men like ourselves and allah most gracious sends no sort of revelation ye do nothing but lie.
they said our lord doth know that we have been sent on a mission to you
and our duty is only to proclaim the clear message.
the people said for us we augur an evil omen from you if ye desist not we will certainly stone you. and a grievous punishment indeed will be inflicted on you by us.
they said your evil omens are with yourselves deem ye this an evil omen. if ye are admonished nay but ye are a people transgressing all bounds
then there came running from the farthest part of the city a man saying o my people obey the messengers
obey those who ask no reward of you for themselves and who have themselves received guidance.
it would not be reasonable in me if i did not serve him who created me and to whom ye shall all be brought back.
shall i take other gods besides him if allah most gracious should intend some adversity for me of no use whatever will be their intercession for me nor can they deliver me.
i would indeed if i were to do so be in manifest error.
for me i have faith in the lord of you all listen then to me
it was said enter thou the garden. he said ah me would that my people knew what i know
for that my lord has granted me forgiveness and has enrolled me among those held in honour
and we sent not down against his people after him any hosts from heaven nor was it needful for us so to do.
it was no more than a single mighty blast and behold they were like ashes quenched and silent.
ah alas for my servants there comes not a messenger to them but they mock him
see they not how many generations before them we destroyed not to them will they return
but each one of them all  will be brought before us for judgment.
a sign for them is the earth that is dead we do give it life and produce grain therefrom of which ye do eat.
and we produce therein orchard with datepalms and vines and we cause springs to gush forth therein
that they may enjoy the fruits of this artistry it was not their hands that made this will they not then give thanks
glory to allah who created in pairs all things that the earth produces as well as their own human kind and other things of which they have no knowledge.
and a sign for them is the night we withdraw therefrom the day and behold they are plunged in darkness
and the sun runs his course for a period determined for him that is the decree of him the exalted in might the allknowing.
and the moonname
it is not permitted to the sun to catch up the moon nor can the night outstrip the day each just swims along in its own orbit according to law.
and a sign for them is that we bore their race through the flood in the loaded ark
and we have created for them similar vessels on which they ride.
if it were our will we could drown them then would there be no helper to hear their cry nor could they be delivered
except by way of mercy from us and by way of world convenience to serve them for a time.
when they are told fear ye that which is before you and that which will be after you in order that ye may receive mercy they turn back.
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord but they turn away therefrom.
and when they are told spend ye of the bounties with which allah has provided you the unbelievers say to those who believe shall we then feed those whom if allah had so willed he would have fed himself ye are in nothing but manifest error.
further they say when will this promise come to pass if what ye say is true
they will not have to wait for aught but a single blast it will seize them while they are yet disputing among themselves
no chance will they then have by will to dispose of their affairs nor to return to their own people
the trumpet shall be sounded when behold from the sepulchres men will rush forth to their lord
they will say ah woe unto us who hath raised us up from our beds of repose... a voice will say this is what allah most gracious had promised. and true was the word of the messengers
it will be no more than a single blast when lo they will all be brought up before us
then on that day not a soul will be wronged in the least and ye shall but be repaid the meeds of your past deeds.
verily the companions of the garden shall that day have joy in all that they do
they and their associates will be in groves of cool shade reclining on thrones of dignity
every fruit enjoyment will be there for them they shall have whatever they call for
peace  a word of salutation from a lord most merciful
and o ye in sin get ye apart this day
did i not enjoin on you o ye children of adam that ye should not worship satan for that he was to you an enemy avowed
and that ye should worship me for that this was the straight way
but he did lead astray a great multitude of you. did ye not then understand
this is the hell of which ye were repeatedly warned
embrace ye the fire this day for that ye persistently rejected truth.
that day shall we set a seal on their mouths. but their hands will speak to us and their feet bear witness to all that they did.
if it had been our will we could surely have blotted out their eyes then should they have run about groping for the path but how could they have seen
and if it had been our will we could have transformed them to remain in their places then should they have been unable to move about nor could they have returned after error.
if we grant long life to any we cause him to be reversed in nature will they not then understand
we have not instructed the prophet in poetry nor is it meet for him this is no less than a message and a qurxban making things clear
that it may give admonition to any who are alive and that the charge may be proved against those who reject truth.
see they not that it is we who have created for them  among the things which our hands have fashioned  cattle which are under their dominion
and that we have subjected them to their use of them some do carry them and some they eat
and they have other profits from them besides and they get milk to drink. will they not then be grateful
yet they take for worship gods other than allah hoping that they might be helped
they have not the power to help them but they will be brought up before our judgmentseat as a troop to be condemned.
let not their speech then grieve thee. verily we know what they hide as well as what they disclose.
doth not man see that it is we who created him from sperm yet behold he stands forth as an open adversary
and he makes comparisons for us and forgets his own origin and creation he says who can give life to dry bones and decomposed ones at that
say he will give them life who created them for the first time for he is wellversed in every kind of creation
the same who produces for you fire out of the green tree when behold ye kindle therewith your own fires
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like thereof  yea indeed for he is the creator supreme of skill and knowledge infinite
verily when he intends a thing his command is be and it is
so glory to him in whose hands is the dominion of all things and to him will ye be all brought back.
by those who range themselves in ranks
and so are strong in repelling evil
and thus proclaim the message of allah
verily verily your allah is one
lord of the heavens and of the earth and all between them and lord of every point at the rising of the sun
we have indeed decked the lower heaven with beauty in the stars
for beauty and for guard against all obstinate rebellious evil spirits
so they should not strain their ears in the direction of the exalted assembly but be cast away from every side
repulsed for they are under a perpetual penalty
except such as snatch away something by stealth and they are pursued by a flaming fire of piercing brightness.
just ask their opinion are they the more difficult to create or the other beings we have created them have we created out of a sticky clay
truly dost thou marvel while they ridicule
and when they are admonished pay no heed
and when they see a sign turn it to mockery
and say this is nothing but evident sorcery
what when we die and become dust and bones shall we then be raised up again
and also our fathers of old
say thou yea and ye shall then be humiliated on account of your evil.
then it will be a single compelling cry and behold they will begin to see
they will say ah woe to us this is the day of judgment
a voice will say this is the day of sorting out whose truth ye once denied
bring ye up it shall be said the wrongdoers and their wives and the things they worshipped
besides allah and lead them to the way to the fierce fire
but stop them for they must be asked
xbwhat is the matter with you that ye help not each otherxb
nay but that day they shall submit to judgment
and they will turn to one another and question one another.
they will say it was ye who used to come to us from the right hand of power and authority
they will reply nay ye yourselves had no faith
nor had we any authority over you. nay it was ye who were a people in obstinate rebellion
so now has been proved true against us the word of our lord that we shall indeed have to taste the punishment of our sins.
we led you astray for truly we were ourselves astray.
truly that day they will all share in the penalty.
verily that is how we shall deal with sinners.
for they when they were told that there is no god except allah would puff themselves up with pride
and say what shall we give up our gods for the sake of a poet possessed
nay he has come with the very truth and he confirms the message of the messengers before him.
ye shall indeed taste of the grievous penalty
but it will be no more than the retribution of the evil that ye have wrought
but the sincere and devoted servants of allah
for them is a sustenance determined
fruits delights and they shall enjoy honour and dignity
in gardens of felicity
facing each other on thrones of dignity
round will be passed to them a cup from a clearflowing fountain
crystalwhite of a taste delicious to those who drink thereof
free from headiness nor will they suffer intoxication therefrom.
and besides them will be chaste women restraining their glances with big eyes of wonder and beauty.
as if they were delicate eggs closely guarded.
then they will turn to one another and question one another.
one of them will start the talk and say i had an intimate companion on the earth
who used to say xbwhat art thou amongst those who bear witness to the truth of the message
xbwhen we die and become dust and bones shall we indeed receive rewards and punishmentsxb
a voice said would ye like to look down
he looked down and saw him in the midst of the fire.
he said by allah thou wast little short of bringing me to perdition
had it not been for the grace of my lord i should certainly have been among those brought there
is it the case that we shall not die
except our first death and that we shall not be punished
verily this is the supreme achievement
for the like of this let all strive who wish to strive.
is that the better entertainment or the tree of zaqqum
for we have truly made it as a trial for the wrongdoers.
for it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of hellfire
the shoots of its fruitstalks are like the heads of devils
truly they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith.
then on top of that they will be given a mixture made of boiling water.
then shall their return be to the blazing fire.
truly they found their fathers on the wrong path
so they too were rushed down on their footsteps
and truly before them many of the ancients went astray
but we sent aforetime among them messengers to admonish them
then see what was the end of those who were admonished but heeded not
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah.
in the days of old noah cried to us and we are the best to hear prayer.
and we delivered him and his people from the great calamity
and made his progeny to endure on this earth
and we left this blessing for him among generations to come in later times
peace and salutation to noah among the nations
thus indeed do we reward those who do right.
for he was one of our believing servants.
then the rest we overwhelmed in the flood.
verily among those who followed his way was abraham.
behold he approached his lord with a sound heart.
behold he said to his father and to his people what is that which ye worship
is it a falsehood gods other than allah that ye desire
then what is your idea about the lord of the worlds
then did he cast a glance at the stars.
and he said i am indeed sick at heart
so they turned away from him and departed.
then did he turn to their gods and said will ye not eat of the offerings before you...
what is the matter with you that ye speak not intelligently
then did he turn upon them striking them with the right hand.
then came the worshippers with hurried steps and faced him.
he said worship ye that which ye have yourselves carved
but allah has created you and your handwork
they said build him a furnace and throw him into the blazing fire
this failing they then sought a stratagem against him but we made them the ones most humiliated
he said i will go to my lord he will surely guide me
o my lord grant me a righteous son
so we gave him the good news of a boy ready to suffer and forbear.
then when the son reached the age of serious work with him he said o my son i see in vision that i offer thee in sacrifice now see what is thy view the son said o my father do as thou art commanded thou will find me if allah so wills one practising patience and constancy
so when they had both submitted their wills to allah and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead for sacrifice
we called out to him o abraham
thou hast already fulfilled the vision  thus indeed do we reward those who do right.
for this was obviously a trial
and we ransomed him with a momentous sacrifice
and we left this blessing for him among generations to come in later times
peace and salutation to abraham
thus indeed do we reward those who do right.
for he was one of our believing servants.
and we gave him the good news of isaac  a prophetname
we blessed him and isaac but of their progeny are some that do right and some that obviously do wrong to their own souls.
again of old we bestowed our favour on moses and aaron
and we delivered them and their people from their great calamity
and we helped them so they overcame their troubles
and we gave them the book which helps to make things clear
and we guided them to the straight way.
and we left this blessing for them among generations to come in later times
peace and salutation to moses and aaron
thus indeed do we reward those who do right.
for they were two of our believing servants.
so also was elias among those sent by us.
behold he said to his people will ye not fear allah
will ye call upon baal and forsake the best of creators
allah your lord and cherisher and the lord and cherisher of your fathers of old
but they rejected him and they will certainly be called up for punishment
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah among them.
and we left this blessing for him among generations to come in later times
peace and salutation to such as elias
thus indeed do we reward those who do right.
for he was one of our believing servants.
so also was lut among those sent by us.
behold we delivered him and his adherents all
except an old woman who was among those who lagged behind
then we destroyed the rest.
verily ye pass by their sites by day
and by night will ye not understand
so also was jonah among those sent by us.
when he ran away like a slave from captivity to the ship fully laden
he agreed to cast lots and he was condemned
then the big fish did swallow him and he had done acts worthy of blame.
had it not been that he repented and glorified allah
he would certainly have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection.
but we cast him forth on the naked shore in a state of sickness
and we caused to grow over him a spreading plant of the gourd kind.
and we sent him on a mission to a hundred thousand men or more.
and they believed so we permitted them to enjoy their life for a while.
now ask them their opinion is it that thy lord has only daughters and they have sons
or that we created the angels female and they are witnesses thereto
is it not that they say from their own invention
allah has begotten children but they are liars
did he then choose daughters rather than sons
what is the matter with you how judge ye
will ye not then receive admonition
or have ye an authority manifest
then bring ye your book of authority if ye be truthful
and they have invented a bloodrelationship between him and the jinns but the jinns know quite well that they have indeed to appear before his judgmentseat
glory to allah he is free from the things they ascribe to him
not so do the servants of allah sincere and devoted.
for verily neither ye nor those ye worship
can lead any into temptation concerning allah
except such as are themselves going to the blazing fire
those ranged in ranks say not one of us but has a place appointed
and we are verily ranged in ranks for service
and we are verily those who declare allahxbs glory
and there were those who said
if only we had had before us a message from those of old
we should certainly have been servants of allah sincere and devoted
but now that the qurxban has come they reject it but soon will they know
already has our word been passed before this to our servants sent by us
that they would certainly be assisted
and that our forcesname
so turn thou away from them for a little while
and watch them how they fare and they soon shall see how thou farest
do they wish indeed to hurry on our punishment
but when it descends into the open space before them evil will be the morning for those who were warned and heeded not
so turn thou away from them for a little while
and watch how they fare and they soon shall see how thou farest
glory to thy lord the lord of honour and power he is free from what they ascribe to him
and peace on the messengers
and praise to allah the lord and cherisher of the worlds.
sad by the qurxban full of admonition this is the truth.
but the unbelievers are steeped in selfglory and separatism.
how many generations before them did we destroy in the end they cried for mercy when there was no longer time for being saved
so they wonder that a warner has come to them from among themselves and the unbelievers say this is a sorcerer telling lies
has he made the gods all into one allah truly this is a wonderful thing
and the leader among them go away impatiently saying walk ye away and remain constant to your gods for this is truly a thing designed against you
we never heard the like of this among the people of these latter days this is nothing but a madeup tale
what has the message been sent to him  of all persons among us...but they are in doubt concerning my own message nay they have not yet tasted my punishment
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lordname the grantor of bounties without measure
or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all between if so let them mount up with the ropes and means to reach that end
but there  will be put to flight even a host of confederates.
before them were many who rejected messengersname and xbad and pharaoh the lord of stakes
and thamud and the people of lut and the companions of the wood  such were the confederates.
not one of them but rejected the messengers but my punishment came justly and inevitably on them.
these today only wait for a single mighty blast which when it comes will brook no delay.
they say our lord hasten to us our sentence even before the day of account
have patience at what they say and remember our servant david the man of strength for he ever turned to allah.
it was we that made the hills declare in unison with him our praises at eventide and at break of day
and the birds gathered in assemblies all with him did turn to allah.
we strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and sound judgment in speech and decision.
has the story of the disputants reached thee behold they climbed over the wall of the private chamber
when they entered the presence of david and he was terrified of them they said fear not we are two disputants one of whom has wronged the other decide now between us with truth and treat us not with injustice but guide us to the even path..
this man is my brother he has nine and ninety ewes and i have but one yet he says xbcommit her to my carexb and is moreover harsh to me in speech.
david said he has undoubtedly wronged thee in demanding thy single ewe to be added to his flock of ewes truly many are the partners in business who wrong each other not so do those who believe and work deeds of righteousness and how few are they...and david gathered that we had tried him he asked forgiveness of his lord fell down bowing in prostration and turned to allah in repentance.
so we forgave him this lapse he enjoyed indeed a near approach to us and a beautiful place of final return.
o david we did indeed make thee a vicegerent on earth so judge thou between men in truth and justice nor follow thou the lusts of thy heart for they will mislead thee from the path of allah for those who wander astray from the path of allah is a penalty grievous for that they forget the day of account.
not without purpose did we create heaven and earth and all between that were the thought of unbelievers but woe to the unbelievers because of the fire of hell
shall we treat those who believe and work deeds of righteousness the same as those who do mischief on earth shall we treat those who guard against evil the same as those who turn aside from the right
here is a book which we have sent down unto thee full of blessings that they may mediate on its signs and that men of understanding may receive admonition.
to david we gave solomon for a son how excellent in our service ever did he turn to us
behold there were brought before him at eventide coursers of the highest breeding and swift of foot
and he said truly do i love the love of good with a view to the glory of my lord until the sun was hidden in the veil of night
bring them back to me. then began he to pass his hand over their legs and their necks.
and we did try solomon we placed on his throne a body without life but he did turn to us in true devotion
he said o my lord forgive me and grant me a kingdom which it may be suits not another after me for thou art the grantor of bounties without measure.
then we subjected the wind to his power to flow gently to his order whithersoever he willed
as also the evil ones including every kind of builder and diver
as also others bound together in fetters.
such are our bounties whether thou bestow them on others or withhold them no account will be asked.
and he enjoyed indeed a near approach to us and a beautiful place of final return.
commemorate our servant job. behold he cried to his lord the evil one has afflicted me with distress and suffering
the command was given strike with thy foot here is water wherein to wash cool and refreshing and water to drink.
and we gave him back his people and doubled their numbername and a thing for commemoration for all who have understanding.
and take in thy hand a little grass and strike therewith and break not thy oath. truly we found him full of patience and constancy. how excellent in our service ever did he turn to us
and commemorate our servants abraham isaac and jacob possessors of power and vision.
verily we did choose them for a special purpose proclaiming the message of the hereafter.
they were in our sight truly of the company of the elect and the good.
and commemorate ismaxbil elisha and zulkifl each of them was of the company of the good.
this is a message of admonition and verily for the righteous is a beautiful place of final return
gardens of eternity whose doors will ever be open to them
therein will they recline at ease therein can they call at pleasure for fruit in abundance and delicious drink
and beside them will be chaste women restraining their glances companions of equal age.
such is the promise made to you for the day of account
truly such will be our bounty to you it will never fail
yea such but  for the wrongdoers will be an evil place of final return
hell they will burn therein  an evil bed indeed to lie on
yea such  then shall they taste itname and a fluid dark murky intensely cold
and other penalties of a similar kind to match them
here is a troop rushing headlong with you no welcome for them truly they shall burn in the fire
the followers shall cry to the misleaders nay ye too no welcome for you it is ye who have brought this upon us now evil is this place to stay in
they will say our lord whoever brought this upon us add to him a double penalty in the fire
and they will say what has happened to us that we see not men whom we used to number among the bad ones
did we treat them as such in ridicule or have our eyes failed to perceive them
truly that is just and fitting the mutual recriminations of the people of the fire
say truly am i a warner no god is there but the one allah supreme and irresistible
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all betweenname able to enforce his will forgiving again and again.
say that is a message supreme above all
from which ye do turn away
no knowledge have i of the chiefs on high when they discuss matters among themselves.
xbonly this has been revealed to me that i am to give warning plainly and publicly.
behold thy lord said to the angels i am about to create man from clay
when i have fashioned him in due proportion and breathed into him of my spirit fall ye down in obeisance unto him.
so the angels prostrated themselves all of them together
not so iblis he was haughty and became one of those who reject faith.
allah said o iblis what prevents thee from prostrating thyself to one whom i have created with my hands art thou haughty or art thou one of the high and mighty ones
iblis said i am better than he thou createdst me from fire and him thou createdst from clay.
allah said then get thee out from here for thou art rejected accursed.
and my curse shall be on thee till the day of judgment.
iblis said o my lord give me then respite till the day the dead are raised.
allah said respite then is granted thee
till the day of the time appointed.
iblis said then by thy power i will put them all in the wrong
except thy servants amongst them sincere and purified by thy grace.
allah said then it is just and fitting and i say what is just and fitting
that i will certainly fill hell with thee and those that follow thee every one.
say no reward do i ask of you for this qurxban nor am i a pretender.
this is no less than a message to all the worlds.
and ye shall certainly know the truth of it all after a while.
the revelation of this book is from allah the exalted in power full of wisdom.
verily it is we who have revealed the book to thee in truth so serve allah offering him sincere devotion.
is it not to allah that sincere devotion is due but those who take for protectors other than allah say we only serve them in order that they may bring us nearer to allah. truly allah will judge between them in that wherein they differ. but allah guides not such as are false and ungrateful.
had allah wished to take to himself a son he could have chosen whom he pleased out of those whom he doth create but glory be to him he is above such things. he is allah the one the irresistible.
he created the heavens and the earth in true proportions he makes the night overlap the day and the day overlap the night he has subjected the sun and the moon to his law each one follows a course for a time appointed. is not he the exalted in power  he who forgives again and again
he created you all from a single person then created of like nature his mate and he sent down for you eight head of cattle in pairs he makes you in the wombs of your mothers in stages one after another in three veils of darkness. such is allah your lord and cherisher to him belongs all dominion. there is no god but he then how are ye turned away from your true centre
if ye reject allah truly allah hath no need of you but he liketh not ingratitude from his servants if ye are grateful he is pleased with you. no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another. in the end to your lord is your return when he will tell you the truth of all that ye did in this life. for he knoweth well all that is in menxbs hearts.
when some trouble toucheth man he crieth unto his lord turning to him in repentance but when he bestoweth a favour upon him as from himself man doth forget what he cried and prayed for before and he doth set up rivals unto allah thus misleading others from allahxbs path. say enjoy thy blasphemy for a little while verily thou art one of the companions of the fire
is one who worships devoutly during the hour of the night prostrating himself or standing in adoration who takes heed of the hereafter and who places his hope in the mercy of his lord  like one who does not say are those equal those who know and those who do not know it is those who are endued with understanding that receive admonition.
say o ye my servants who believe fear your lord good is the reward for those who do good in this world. spacious is allahxbs earth those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without measure
say verily i am commanded to serve allah with sincere devotion
and i am commanded to be the first of those who bow to allah in islam.
say i would if i disobeyed my lord indeed have fear of the penalty of a mighty day.
say it is allah i serve with my sincere and exclusive devotion
serve ye what ye will besides him. say truly those in loss are those who lose their own souls and their people on the day of judgment ah that is indeed the real and evident loss
they shall have layers of fire above them and layers of fire below them with this doth allah warn off his servants o my servants then fear ye me
those who eschew evilnamenamename
those who listen to the word and follow the best meaning in it those are the ones whom allah has guided and those are the ones endued with understanding.
is then one against whom the decree of punishment is justly due equal to one who eschews evil wouldst thou then deliver one who is in the fire
but it is for those who fear their lord. that lofty mansions one above another have been built beneath them flow rivers of delight such is the promise of allah never doth allah fail in his promise.
seest thou not that allah sends down rain from the sky and leads it through springs in the earth then he causes to grow therewith produce of various colours then it withers thou wilt see it grow yellow then he makes it dry up and crumble away. truly in this is a message of remembrance to men of understanding.
is one whose heart allah has opened to islam so that he has received enlightenment from allah no better than one hardhearted woe to those whose hearts are hardened against celebrating the praises of allah they are manifestly wandering in error
allah has revealed from time to time the most beautiful message in the form of a book consistent with itself yet repeating its teaching in various aspects the skins of those who fear their lord tremble thereat then their skins and their hearts do soften to the celebration of allahxbs praises. such is the guidance of allah he guides therewith whom he pleases but such as allah leaves to stray can have none to guide.
is then one who has to fear the brunt of the penalty on the day of judgment and receive it on his face like one guarded therefrom it will be said to the wrongdoers taste ye the fruits of what ye earned
those before them also rejected revelation and so the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive.
so allah gave them a taste of humiliation in the present life but greater is the punishment of the hereafter if they only knew
we have put forth for men in this qurxban every kind of parable in order that they may receive admonition.
it is a qurxban in arabic without any crookedness therein in order that they may guard against evil.
allah puts forth a parable a man belonging to many partners at variance with each other and a man belonging entirely to one master are those two equal in comparison praise be to allah but most of them have no knowledge.
truly thou wilt die one day and truly they too will die one day.
in the end will ye all on the day of judgment settle your disputes in the presence of your lord.
who then doth more wrong than one who utters a lie concerning allah and rejects the truth when it comes to him is there not in hell an abode for blasphemers
and he who brings the truth and he who confirms and supports it  such are the men who do right.
they shall have all that they wish for in the presence of their lord such is the reward of those who do good
so that allah will turn off from them even the worst in their deeds and give them their reward according to the best of what they have done.
is not allah enough for his servant but they try to frighten thee with other gods besides him for such as allah leaves to stray there can be no guide.
and such as allah doth guide there can be none to lead astray. is not allah exalted in power able to enforce his will lord of retribution
if indeed thou ask them who it is that created the heavens and the earth they would be sure to say allah. say see ye then the things that ye invoke besides allahname if allah wills some penalty for me remove his penalty or if he wills some grace for me can they keep back his grace say sufficient is allah for me in him trust those who put their trust.
say o my people do whatever ye can i will do my part but soon will ye know
who it is to whom comes a penalty of ignominy and on whom descends a penalty that abides.
verily we have revealed the book to thee in truth for instructing mankind. he then that receives guidance benefits his own soul but he that strays injures his own soul. nor art thou set over them to dispose of their affairs.
it is allah that takes the souls of men at death and those that die not he takes during their sleep those on whom he has passed the decree of death he keeps back from returning to life but the rest he sends to their bodies for a term appointed verily in this are signs for those who reflect.
what do they take for intercessors others besides allah say even if they have no power whatever and no intelligence
say to allah belongs exclusively the right to grant intercession to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth in the end it is to him that ye shall be brought back.
when allah the one and only is mentioned the hearts of those who believe not in the hereafter are filled with disgust and horror but when gods other than he are mentioned behold they are filled with joy
say o allah creator of the heavens and the earth knower of all that is hidden and open it is thou that wilt judge between thy servants in those matters about which they have differed.
even if the wrongdoers had all that there is on earth and as much more in vain would they offer it for ransom from the pain of the penalty on the day of judgment but something will confront them from allah which they could never have counted upon
for the evils of their deeds will confront them and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at
now when trouble touches man he cries to us but when we bestow a favour upon him as from ourselves he says this has been given to me because of a certain knowledge i have nay but this is but a trial but most of them understand not
thus did the generations before them say but all that they did was of no profit to them.
nay the evil results of their deeds overtook them. and the wrongdoers of this generation the evil results of their deeds will soon overtake them too and they will never be able to frustrate our plan
know they not that allah enlarges the provision or restricts it for any he pleases verily in this are signs for those who believe
say o my servants who have transgressed against their souls despair not of the mercy of allah for allah forgives all sins for he is oftforgiving most merciful.
turn ye to our lord in repentance and bow to his will before the penalty comes on you after that ye shall not be helped.
and follow the best of the courses revealed to you from your lord before the penalty comes on you  of a sudden while ye perceive not
lest the soul should then say xbah woe is me in that i neglected my duty towards allah and was but among those who mockedxb
or lest it should say xbif only allah had guided me i should certainly have been among the righteousxb
or lest it should say when it actually sees the penalty xbif only i had another chance i should certainly be among those who do goodxb
the reply will be xbnay but there came to thee my signs and thou didst reject them thou wast haughty and became one of those who reject faithxb
on the day of judgment wilt thou see those who told lies against allah their faces will be turned black is there not in hell an abode for the haughty
but allah will deliver the righteous to their place of salvation no evil shall touch them nor shall they grieve.
allah is the creator of all things and he is the guardian and disposer of all affairs.
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth and those who reject the signs of allahname
say is it some one other than allah that ye order me to worship o ye ignorant ones
but it has already been revealed to theename if thou wert to join gods with allah truly fruitless will be thy work in life and thou wilt surely be in the ranks of those who lose all spiritual good.
nay but worship allah and be of those who give thanks.
no just estimate have they made of allah such as is due to him on the day of judgment the whole of the earth will be but his handful and the heavens will be rolled up in his right hand glory to him high is he above the partners they attribute to him
the trumpet will just be sounded when all that are in the heavens and on earth will swoon except such as it will please allah to exempt. then will a second one be sounded when behold they will be standing and looking on
and the earth will shine with the glory of its lord the record of deeds will be placed open the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward and a just decision pronounced between them and they will not be wronged in the least.
and to every soul will be paid in full the fruit of its deeds and allah knoweth best all that they do.
the unbelievers will be led to hell in crowd until when they arrive there its gates will be opened. and its keepers will say did not messengers come to you from among yourselves rehearsing to you the signs of your lord and warning you of the meeting of this day of yours the answer will be true but the decree of punishment has been proved true against the unbelievers
to them will be said enter ye the gates of hell to dwell therein and evil is this abode of the arrogant
and those who feared their lord will be led to the garden in crowds until behold they arrive there its gates will be opened and its keepers will say peace be upon you well have ye done enter ye here to dwell therein.
they will say praise be to allah who has truly fulfilled his promise to us and has given us this land in heritage we can dwell in the garden as we will how excellent a reward for those who work righteousness
and thou wilt see the angels surrounding the throne divine on all sides singing glory and praise to their lord. the decision between them at judgment will be in perfect justice and the cry on all sides will be praise be to allah the lord of the worlds
ha mim
the revelation of this book is from allah exalted in power full of knowledge
who forgiveth sin accepteth repentance is strict in punishment and hath a long reach in all things. there is no god but he to him is the final goal.
none can dispute about the signs of allah but the unbelievers. let not then their strutting about through the land deceive thee
but there were people before them who denied the signsname and the confederates of evil after them and every people plotted against their prophet to seize him and disputed by means of vanities therewith to condemn the truth but it was i that seized them and how terrible was my requital
thus was the decree of thy lord proved true against the unbelievers that truly they are companions of the fire
those who sustain the throne of allah and those around it sing glory and praise to their lord believe in him and implore forgiveness for those who believe our lord thy reach is over all things in mercy and knowledge. forgive then those who turn in repentance and follow thy path and preserve them from the penalty of the blazing fire
and grant our lord that they enter the gardens of eternity which thou hast promised to them and to the righteous among their fathers their wives and their posterity for thou art he the exalted in might full of wisdom.
and preserve them from all ills and any whom thou dost preserve from ills that day on them wilt thou have bestowed mercy indeed and that will be truly for them the highest achievement.
the unbelievers will be addressed greater was the aversion of allah to you than is your aversion to yourselves seeing that ye were called to the faith and ye used to refuse.
they will say our lord twice hast thou made us without life and twice hast thou given us life now have we recognised our sins is there any way out of this
the answer will be this is because when allah was invoked as the only object of worship ye did reject faith but when partners were joined to him ye believed the command is with allah most high most great
he it is who showeth you his signs and sendeth down sustenance for you from the sky but only those receive admonition who turn to allah.
call ye then upon allah with sincere devotion to him even though the unbelievers may detest it.
raised high above ranks or degrees he is the lord of the throne of authority by his command doth he send the spirit of inspiration to any of his servants he pleases that it may warn men of the day of mutual meeting
the day whereon they will all come forth not a single thing concerning them is hidden from allah. whose will be the dominion that day that of allah the one the irresistible
that day will every soul be requited for what it earned no injustice will there be that day for allah is swift in taking account.
warn them of the day that is ever drawing near when the hearts will come right up to the throats to choke them no intimate friend nor intercessor will the wrongdoers have who could be listened to.
allah knows of the tricks that deceive with the eyes and all that the hearts of men conceal.
and allah will judge with justice and truth but those whom men invoke besides him will not be in a position to judge at all. verily it is allah alone who hears and sees all things.
do they not travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before them they were even superior to them in strength and in the traces they have left in the land but allah did call them to account for their sins and none had they to defend them against allah.
that was because there came to them their messengers with clear signs but they rejected them so allah called them to account for he is full of strength strict in punishment.
of old we sent moses with our signs and an authority manifest
to pharaoh haman and qarun but they called him a sorcerer telling lies...
now when he came to them in truth from us they said slay the sons of those who believe with him and keep alive their females but the plots of unbelievers end in nothing but errors and delusions...
said pharaoh leave me to slay moses and let him call on his lord what i fear is lest he should change your religion or lest he should cause mischief to appear in the land
moses said i have indeed called upon my lord and your lord for protection from every arrogant one who believes not in the day of account
a believer a man from among the people of pharaoh who had concealed his faith said will ye slay a man because he says xbmy lord is allahxb when he has indeed come to you with clear signs from your lord and if he be a liar on him is the sin of his lie but if he is telling the truth then will fall on you something of the calamity of which he warns you truly allah guides not one who transgresses and lies
o my people yours is the dominion this day ye have the upper hand in the land but who will help us from the punishment of allah should it befall us pharaoh said i but point out to you that which i see myself nor do i guide you but to the path of right
then said the man who believed o my people truly i do fear for you something like the day of disaster of the confederates in sin
something like the fate of the people of noah the xbad and the thamud and those who came after them but allah never wishes injustice to his servants.
and o my people i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling and wailing
a day when ye shall turn your backs and flee no defender shall ye have from allah any whom allah leaves to stray there is none to guide...
and to you there came joseph in times gone by with clear signs but ye ceased not to doubt of the mission for which he had come at length when he died ye said xbno messenger will allah send after him.xb thus doth allah leave to stray such as transgress and live in doubt
such as dispute about the signs of allah without any authority that hath reached them grievous and odious is such conduct in the sight of allah and of the believers. thus doth allah seal up every heart  of arrogant and obstinate transgressors.
pharaoh said o haman build me a lofty palace that i may attain the ways and means
the ways and means of reaching the heavens and that i may mount up to the god of moses but as far as i am concerned i think moses is a liar thus was made alluring in pharaohxbs eyes the evil of his deeds and he was hindered from the path and the plot of pharaoh led to nothing but perdition for him.
the man who believed said further o my people follow me i will lead you to the path of right.
o my people this life of the present is nothing but temporary convenience it is the hereafter that is the home that will last.
he that works evil will not be requited but by the like thereof and he that works a righteous deed  whether man or woman  and is a believer such will enter the garden of bliss therein will they have abundance without measure.
and o my people how strange it is for me to call you to salvation while ye call me to the fire
ye do call upon me to blaspheme against allah and to join with him partners of whom i have no knowledge and i call you to the exalted in power who forgives again and again
without doubt ye do call me to one who is not fit to be called to whether in this world or in the hereafter our return will be to allah and the transgressors will be companions of the fire
soon will ye remember what i say to you now my own affair i commit to allah for allah ever watches over his servants.
then allah saved him from every ill that they plotted against him but the burnt of the penalty encompassed on all sides the people of pharaoh.
in front of the fire will they be brought morning and evening and the sentence will be on the day that judgment will be established cast ye the people of pharaoh into the severest penalty
behold they will dispute with each other in the fire the weak ones who followed will say to those who had been arrogant we but followed you can ye then take on yourselves from us some share of the fire
those who had been arrogant will say we are all in this fire truly allah has judged between his servants
those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell pray to your lord to lighten us the penalty for a day at least
they will say did there not come to you your messengers with clear signs they will say yes. they will reply then pray as ye like but the prayer of those without faith is nothing but futile wandering in mazes of error
we will without doubt help our messengers and those who believe both in this worldxbs life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth
the day when no profit will it be to wrongdoers to present their excuses but they will only have the curse and the home of misery.
we did aforetime give moses the book of guidance and we gave the book in inheritance to the children of israel
a guide and a message to men of understanding.
patiently then persevere for the promise of allah is true and ask forgiveness for thy fault and celebrate the praises of thy lord in the evening and in the morning.
those who dispute about the signs of allah without any authority bestowed on themname which they shall never attain to seek refuge then in allah it is he who hears and sees all things.
assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is a greater matter than the creation of men yet most men understand not.
not equal are the blind and those who clearly see nor are equal those who believe and work deeds of righteousness and those who do evil. little do ye learn by admonition
the hour will certainly come therein is no doubt yet most men believe not.
and your lord says call on me i will answer your prayer but those who are too arrogant to serve me will surely find themselves in hell  in humiliation
it is allah who has made the night for you that ye may rest therein and the days as that which helps you to see. verily allah is full of grace and bounty to men yet most men give no thanks.
such is allah your lord the creator of all things there is no god but he then how ye are deluded away from the truth
thus are deluded those who are wont to reject the signs of allah.
it is allah who has made for you the earth as a resting place and the sky as a canopy and has given you shape and made your shapes beautifulname of things pure and good such is allah your lord. so glory to allah the lord of the worlds
he is the living one there is no god but he call upon him giving him sincere devotion. praise be to allah lord of the worlds
say i have been forbidden to invoke those whom ye invoke besides allah seeing that the clear signs have come to me from my lord and i have been commanded to bow in islam to the lord of the worlds.
it is he who has created you from dust then from a spermdrop then from a leechlike clot then does he get you out into the light as a child then lets you grow and reach your age of full strength then lets you become old though of you there are some who die before and lets you reach a term appointed in order that ye may learn wisdom.
it is he who gives life and death and when he decides upon an affair he says to it be and it is.
seest thou not those that dispute concerning the signs of allah how are they turned away from reality
those who reject the book and the revelations with which we sent our messengers but soon shall they know
when the yokes shall be round their necks and the chains they shall be dragged along
in the boiling fetid fluid then in the fire shall they be burned
then shall it be said to them where are the deities to which ye gave partworship
in derogation of allah they will reply they have left us in the lurch nay we invoked not of old anything that had real existence. thus does allah leave the unbelievers to stray.
that was because ye were wont to rejoice on the earth in things other than the truth and that ye were wont to be insolent.
enter ye the gates of hell to dwell therein and evil is this abode of the arrogant
so persevere in patience for the promise of allah is true and whether we show thee in this life some part of what we promise themnamename
we did aforetime send messengers before thee of them there are some whose story we have related to thee and some whose story we have not related to thee. it was not possible for any messenger to bring a sign except by the leave of allah but when the command of allah issued the matter was decided in truth and justice and there perished there and then those who stood on falsehoods.
it is allah who made cattle for you that ye may use some for riding and some for food
and there are other advantages in them for you besides that ye may through them attain to any need there may be in your hearts and on them and on ships ye are carried.
and he shows you always his signs then which of the signs of allah will ye deny
do they not travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before them they were more numerous than these and superior in strength and in the traces they have left in the land yet all that they accomplished was of no profit to them.
for when their messengers came to them with clear signs they exulted in such knowledge and skill as they had but that very wrath at which they were wont to scoff hemmed them in.
but when they saw our punishment they said we believe in allah the one allah  and we reject the partners we used to join with him.
but their professing the faith when they actually saw our punishment was not going to profit them. such has been allahxbs way of dealing with his servants from the most ancient times. and even thus did the rejecters of allah perish utterly
ha mim
a revelation from allah most gracious most merciful
a book whereof the verses are explained in detail a qurxban in arabic for people who understand
giving good news and admonition yet most of them turn away and so they hear not.
they say our hearts are under veils concealed from that to which thou dost invite us and in our ears in a deafness and between us and thee is a screen so do thou what thou wilt for us we shall do what we will
say thou i am but a man like you it is revealed to me by inspiration that your allah is one allah so stand true to him and ask for his forgiveness. and woe to those who join gods with allah
those who practise not regular charity and who even deny the hereafter.
for those who believe and work deeds of righteousness is a reward that will never fail.
say is it that ye deny him who created the earth in two days and do ye join equals with him he is the lord of all the worlds.
he set on the earth mountains standing firm high above it and bestowed blessings on the earth and measure therein all things to give them nourishment in due proportion in four days in accordance with the needs of those who seek sustenance.
moreover he comprehended in his design the sky and it had been as smoke he said to it and to the earth come ye together willingly or unwillingly. they said we do come together in willing obedience.
so he completed them as seven firmaments in two days and he assigned to each heaven its duty and command. and we adorned the lower heaven with lights and provided it with guard. such is the decree of him the exalted in might full of knowledge.
but if they turn away say thou i have warned you of a stunning punishment as of thunder and lightning like that which overtook the xbad and the thamud
behold the messengers came to them from before them and behind them preaching serve none but allah. they said if our lord had so pleased he would certainly have sent down angels to preach. now we reject your mission altogether.
now the xbad behaved arrogantly through the land against all truth and reason and said who is superior to us in strength what did they not see that allah who created them was superior to them in strength but they continued to reject our signs
so we sent against them a furious wind through days of disaster that we might give them a taste of a penalty of humiliation in this life but the penalty of a hereafter will be more humiliating still and they will find no help.
as to the thamud we gave them guidance but they preferred blindness of heart to guidance so the stunning punishment of humiliation seized them because of what they had earned.
but we delivered those who believed and practised righteousness.
on the day that the enemies of allah will be gathered together to the fire they will be marched in ranks.
at length when they reach the fire their hearing their sight and their skins will bear witness against them as to all their deeds.
they will say to their skins why bear ye witness against us they will say allah hath given us speechname and unto him were ye to return.
ye did not seek to hide yourselves lest your hearing your sight and your skins should bear witness against you but ye did think that allah knew not many of the things that ye used to do
but this thought of yours which ye did entertain concerning your lord hath brought you to destruction and now have ye become of those utterly lost
if then they have patience the fire will be a home for them and if they beg to be received into favour into favour will they not then be received.
and we have destined for them intimate companions of like nature who made alluring to them what was before them and behind them and the sentence among the previous generations of jinns and men who have passed away is proved against them for they are utterly lost.
the unbelievers say listen not to this qurxban but talk at random in the midst of its reading that ye may gain the upper hand
but we will certainly give the unbelievers a taste of a severe penalty and we will requite them for the worst of their deeds.
such is the requital of the enemies of allahname for that they were wont to reject our signs.
and the unbelievers will say our lord show us those among jinns and men who misled us we shall crush them beneath our feet so that they become the vilest before all.
in the case of those who say our lord is allah and further stand straight and steadfast the angels descend on them from time to time fear ye not they suggest nor grieve but receive the glad tidings of the garden of bliss the which ye were promised
we are your protectors in this life and in the hereafter therein shall ye have all that your souls shall desire therein shall ye have all that ye ask for
a hospitable gift from one oftforgiving most merciful
who is better in speech than one who calls men to allah works righteousness and says i am of those who bow in islam
nor can goodness and evil be equal. repel evil with what is better then will he between whom and thee was hatred become as it were thy friend and intimate
and no one will be granted such goodness except those who exercise patience and selfrestraintname
and if at any time an incitement to discord is made to thee by the evil one seek refuge in allah. he is the one who hears and knows all things.
among his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon. do not prostrate to the sun and the moon but prostrate to allah who created them if it is him ye wish to serve.
but is the unbelievers are arrogant no matter for in the presence of thy lord are those who celebrate his praises by night and by day. and they never flag nor feel themselves above it.
and among his signs in this thou seest the earth barren and desolate but when we send down rain to it it is stirred to life and yields increase. truly he who gives life to the dead earth can surely give life to men who are dead. for he has power over all things.
those who pervert the truth in our signs are not hidden from us. which is better he that is cast into the fire or he that comes safe through on the day of judgment do what ye will verily he seeth clearly all that ye do.
those who reject the message when it comes to them are not hidden from us. and indeed it is a book of exalted power.
no falsehood can approach it from before or behind it it is sent down by one full of wisdom worthy of all praise.
nothing is said to thee that was not said to the messengers before thee that thy lord has at his command all forgiveness as well as a most grievous penalty.
had we sent this as a qurxban in the language other than arabic they would have said why are not its verses explained in detail what a book not in arabic and a messenger an arab say it is a guide and a healing to those who believe and for those who believe not there is a deafness in their ears and it is blindness in their eyes they are as it were being called from a place far distant
we certainly gave moses the book aforetime but disputes arose therein. had it not been for a word that went forth before from thy lord their differences would have been settled between them but they remained in suspicious disquieting doubt thereon.
whoever works righteousness benefits his own soul whoever works evil it is against his own soul nor is thy lord ever unjust in the least to his servants.
to him is referred the knowledge of the hour of judgment he knows all no datefruit comes out of its sheath nor does a female conceive within her womb nor bring forth the day that allah will propound to them the question where are the partners ye attributed to me they will say we do assure thee not one of us can bear witness
the deities they used to invoke aforetime will leave them in the lurch and they will perceive that they have no way of escape.
man does not weary of asking for good things but if ill touches him he gives up all hope and is lost in despair.
when we give him a taste of some mercy from ourselves after some adversity has touched him he is sure to say this is due to my merit i think not that the hour of judgment will ever be established but if i am brought back to my lord i have much good stored in his sight but we will show the unbelievers the truth of all that they did and we shall give them the taste of a severe penalty.
when we bestow favours on man he turns away and gets himself remote on his side instead of coming to us and when evil seizes him he comes full of prolonged prayer
say see ye if the revelation is really from allah and yet do ye reject it who is more astray than one who is in a schism far from any purpose
soon will we show them our signs in the furthest regions of the earth and in their own souls until it becomes manifest to them that this is the truth. is it not enough that thy lord doth witness all things
ah indeed are they in doubt concerning the meeting with their lord ah indeed it is he that doth encompass all things
hamim
xbain. sin. qaf.
thus doth he send inspiration to thee as he did to those before theename exalted in power full of wisdom.
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth and he is most high most great.
the heavens are almost rent asunder from above them by him glory and the angels celebrate the praises of their lord and pray for forgiveness for all beings on earth behold verily allah is he the oftforgiving most merciful.
and those who take as protectors others besides him allah doth watch over them and thou art not the disposer of their affairs.
thus have we sent by inspiration to thee an arabic qurxban that thou mayest warn the mother of cities and all around hername of which there is no doubt when some will be in the garden and some in the blazing fire.
if allah had so willed he could have made them a single people but he admits whom he will to his mercy and the wrongdoers will have no protector nor helper.
what have they taken for worship protectors besides him but it is allahname and it is he who gives life to the dead it is he who has power over all things
whatever it be wherein ye differ the decision thereof is with allah such is allah my lord in him i trust and to him i turn.
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth he has made for you pairs from among yourselves and pairs among cattle by this means does he multiply you there is nothing whatever like unto him and he is the one that hears and sees all things.
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth he enlarges and restricts. the sustenance to whom he will for he knows full well all things.
the same religion has he established for you as that which he enjoined on noah  the which we have sent by inspiration to thee  and that which we enjoined on abraham moses and jesus namely that ye should remain steadfast in religion and make no divisions therein to those who worship other things than allah hard is the way to which thou callest them. allah chooses to himself those whom he pleases and guides to himself those who turn to him.
and they became divided only after knowledge reached themname tending to a term appointed the matter would have been settled between them but truly those who have inherited the book after them are in suspicious disquieting doubt concerning it.
now then for that reason call them to the faith and stand steadfast as thou art commanded nor follow thou their vain desires but say i believe in the book which allah has sent down and i am commanded to judge justly between you. allah is our lord and your lord for us is the responsibility for our deeds and for you for your deeds. there is no contention between us and you. allah will bring us together and to him is our final goal.
but those who dispute concerning allah after he has been acceptedname
it is allah who has sent down the book in truth and the balance by which to weigh conduct. and what will make thee realise that perhaps the hour is close at hand
only those wish to hasten it who believe not in it those who believe hold it in awe and know that it is the truth. behold verily those that dispute concerning the hour are far astray.
gracious is allah to his servants he gives sustenance to whom he pleases and he has power and can carry out his will.
to any that desires the tilth of the hereafter we give increase in his tilth and to any that desires the tilth of this world we grant somewhat thereof but he has no share or lot in the hereafter.
what have they partners in godhead who have established for them some religion without the permission of allah had it not been for the decree of judgment the matter would have been decided between them at once. but verily the wrongdoers will have a grievous penalty.
thou wilt see the wrongdoers in fear on account of what they have earned and the burden of that must necessarily fall on them. but those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in the luxuriant meads of the gardens they shall have before their lord all that they wish for. that will indeed be the magnificent bounty of allah.
that is the bounty whereof allah gives glad tidings to his servants who believe and do righteous deeds. say no reward do i ask of you for this except the love of those near of kin. and if any one earns any good we shall give him an increase of good in respect thereof for allah is oftforgiving most ready to appreciate service.
what do they say he has forged a falsehood against allah but if allah willed he could seal up thy heart. and allah blots out vanity and proves the truth by his words. for he knows well the secrets of all hearts.
he is the one that accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and he knows all that ye do.
and he listens to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness and gives them increase of his bounty but for the unbelievers their is a terrible penalty.
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants they would indeed transgress beyond all bounds through the earth but he sends it down in due measure as he pleases. for he is with his servants wellacquainted watchful.
he is the one that sends down rain even after men have given up all hope and scatters his mercy far and wide. and he is the protector worthy of all praise.
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the living creatures that he has scattered through them and he has power to gather them together when he wills.
whatever misfortune happens to you is because on the things your hands have wrought and for many of them he grants forgiveness.
nor can ye frustrate aught fleeing through the earth nor have ye besides allah any one to protect or to help.
and among his signs are the ships smoothrunning through the ocean tall as mountains.
if it be his will he can still the wind then would they become motionless on the back of the ocean. verily in this are signs for everyone who patiently perseveres and is grateful.
or he can cause them to perish because of the evil which the men have earned but much doth he forgive.
but let those know who dispute about our signs that there is for them no way of escape.
whatever ye are given here is but a convenience of this life but that which is with allah is better and more lasting it is for those who believe and put their trust in their lord
those who avoid the greater crimes and shameful deeds and when they are angry even then forgive
those who hearken to their lord and establish regular prayer who conduct their affairs by mutual consultation who spend out of what we bestow on them for sustenance
and those who when an oppressive wrong is inflicted on them are not cowed but help and defend themselves.
the recompense for an injury is an injury equal thereto in degree but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation his reward is due from allah for allah loveth not those who do wrong.
but indeed if any do help and defend themselves after a wrong done to them against such there is no cause of blame.
the blame is only against those who oppress men and wrongdoing and insolently transgress beyond bounds through the land defying right and justice for such there will be a penalty grievous.
but indeed if any show patience and forgive that would truly be an exercise of courageous will and resolution in the conduct of affairs.
for any whom allah leaves astray there is no protector thereafter. and thou wilt see the wrongdoers when in sight of the penalty say is there any way to effect a return
and thou wilt see them brought forward to the penalty in a humble frame of mind because of their disgrace and looking with a stealthy glance. and the believers will say those are indeed in loss who have given to perdition their own selves and those belonging to them on the day of judgment. behold truly the wrongdoers are in a lasting penalty
and no protectors have they to help them other than allah. and for any whom allah leaves to stray there is no way to the goal.
hearken ye to your lord before there come a day which there will be no putting back because of the ordainment of allah that day there will be for you no place of refuge nor will there be for you any room for denial of your sins
if then they run away we have not sent thee as a guard over them. thy duty is but to convey the message. and truly when we give man a taste of a mercy from ourselves he doth exult thereat but when some ill happens to him on account of the deeds which his hands have sent forth truly then is man ungrateful
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. he creates what he wills and plans. he bestows children male or female according to his will and plan
or he bestows both males and females and he leaves barren whom he will for he is full of knowledge and power.
it is not fitting for a man that allah should speak to him except by inspiration or from behind a veil or by the sending of a messenger to reveal with allahxbs permission what allah wills for he is most high most wise.
and thus have we by our command sent inspiration to thee thou knewest not before what was revelation and what was faith but we have made the qurxban a light wherewith we guide such of our servants as we will and verily thou dost guide men to the straight way
the way of allah to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth. behold how all affairs tend towards allah
hamim
by the book that makes things clear
we have made it a qurxban in arabic that ye may be able to understand and learn wisdom.
and verily it is in the mother of the book in our presence high in dignity full of wisdom.
shall we then take away the message from you and repel you for that ye are a people transgressing beyond bounds
but how many were the prophets we sent amongst the peoples of old
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him.
so we destroyed them stronger in power than these and thus has passed on the parable of the peoples of old.
if thou wert to question them xbwho created the heavens and the earthxb they would be sure to reply xbthey were created by him the exalted in power full of knowledgexb
yea the same that has made for you the earth like a carpet spread out and has made for you roads and channels therein in order that ye may find guidance on the way
that sends down from time to time rain from the sky in due measure and we raise to life therewith a land that is dead even so will ye be raised from the dead
that has created pairs in all things and has made for you ships and cattle on which ye ride
in order that ye may sit firm and square on their backs and when so seated ye may celebrate the kind favour of your lord and say glory to him who has subjected these to our use for we could never have accomplished this by ourselves
and to our lord surely must we turn back
yet they attribute to some of his servants a share with him in his godhead truly is man a blasphemous ingrate avowed
what has he taken daughters out of what he himself creates and granted to you sons for choice
when news is brought to one of them of the birth of what he sets up as a likeness to allah most gracious his face darkens and he is filled with inward grief
is then one brought up among trinkets and unable to give a clear account in a dispute to be associated with allah
and they make into females angels who themselves serve allah. did they witness their creation their evidence will be recorded and they will be called to account
ah they say if it had been the will of allah most gracious we should not have worshipped such deities of that they have no knowledge they do nothing but lie
what have we given them a book before this to which they are holding fast
nay they say we found our fathers following a certain religion and we do guide ourselves by their footsteps.
just in the same way whenever we sent a warner before thee to any people the wealthy ones among them said we found our fathers following a certain religion and we will certainly follow in their footsteps.
he said what even if i brought you better guidance than that which ye found your fathers following they said for us we deny that ye prophets are sent on a mission at all.
so we exacted retribution from them now see what was the end of those who rejected truth
behold abraham said to his father and his people i do indeed clear myself of what ye worship
i worship only him who made me and he will certainly guide me.
and he left it as a word to endure among those who came after him that they may turn back to allah.
yea i have given the good things of this life to these men and their fathers until the truth has come to them and a messenger making things clear.
but when the truth came to them they said this is sorcery and we do reject it.
also they say why is not this qurxban sent down to some leading man in either of the two chief cities
is it they who would portion out the mercy of thy lord it is we who portion out between them their livelihood in the life of this world and we raise some of them above others in ranks so that some may command work from others. but the mercy of thy lord is better than the wealth which they amass.
and were it not that all men might become of one evil way of life we would provide for everyone that blasphemes against allah most gracious silver roofs for their houses and silver stairways on which to go up
and silver doors to their houses and thrones of silver on which they could recline
and also adornments of gold. but all this were nothing but conveniences of the present life the hereafter in the sight of thy lord is for the righteous.
if anyone withdraws himself from remembrance of allah most gracious we appoint for him an evil one to be an intimate companion to him.
such evil ones really hinder them from the path but they think that they are being guided aright
at length when such a one comes to us he says to his evil companion would that between me and thee were the distance of east and west ah evil is the companion indeed
when ye have done wrong it will avail you nothing that day that ye shall be partners in punishment
canst thou then make the deaf to hear or give direction to the blind or to such as wander in manifest error
even if we take thee away we shall be sure to exact retribution from them
or we shall show thee that accomplished which we have promised them for verily we shall prevail over them.
so hold thou fast to the revelation sent down to thee verily thou art on a straight way.
the qurxban is indeed the message for thee and for thy people and soon shall ye all be brought to account.
and question thou our messengers whom we sent before thee did we appoint any deities other than allah most gracious to be worshipped
we did send moses aforetime with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs he said i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds.
but when he came to them with our signs behold they ridiculed them.
we showed them sign after sign each greater than its fellow and we seized them with punishment in order that they might turn to us.
and they said o thou sorcerer invoke thy lord for us according to his covenant with thee for we shall truly accept guidance.
but when we removed the penalty from them behold they broke their word.
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people saying o my people does not the dominion of egypt belong to me witness these streams flowing underneath my palace what see ye not then
am i not better than this moses who is a contemptible wretch and can scarcely express himself clearly
then why are not gold bracelets bestowed on him or why come not with him angels accompanying him in procession
thus did he make fools of his people and they obeyed him truly were they a people rebellious against allah.
when at length they provoked us we exacted retribution from them and we drowned them all.
and we made them a people of the past and an example to later ages.
when jesus the son of mary is held up as an example behold thy people raise a clamour thereat in ridicule
and they say are our gods best or he this they set forth to thee only by way of disputation yea they are a contentious people.
he was no more than a servant we granted our favour to him and we made him an example to the children of israel.
and if it were our will we could make angels from amongst you succeeding each other on the earth.
and jesus shall be a sign for the coming of the hour of judgment therefore have no doubt about the hour but follow ye me this is a straight way.
let not the evil one hinder you for he is to you an enemy avowed.
when jesus came with clear signs he said now have i come to you with wisdom and in order to make clear to you some of the points on which ye dispute therefore fear allah and obey me.
for allah he is my lord and your lord so worship ye him this is a straight way.
but sects from among themselves fell into disagreement then woe to the wrongdoers from the penalty of a grievous day
do they only wait for the hour  that it should come on them all of a sudden while they perceive not
friends on that day will be foes one to anothername
my devotees no fear shall be on you that day nor shall ye grieve
being those who have believed in our signs and bowed their wills to ours in islam.
enter ye the garden ye and your wives in beauty and rejoicing.
to them will be passed round dishes and goblets of gold there will be there all that the souls could desire all that their ayes could delight in and ye shall abide therein for eye.
such will be the garden of which ye are made heirs for your good deeds in life.
ye shall have therein abundance of fruit from which ye shall have satisfaction.
the sinners will be in the punishment of hell to dwell therein for aye
nowise will the punishment be lightened for them and in despair will they be there overwhelmed.
nowise shall we be unjust to them but it is they who have been unjust themselves.
they will cry o malik would that thy lord put an end to us he will say nay but ye shall abide
verily we have brought the truth to you but most of you have a hatred for truth.
what have they settled some plan among themselves but it is we who settle things.
or do they think that we hear not their secrets and their private counsels indeed we do and our messengers are by them to record.
say if allah most gracious had a son i would be the first to worship.
glory to the lord of the heavens and the earth the lord of the throne of authority he is free from the things they attribute to him
so leave them to babble and play with vanities until they meet that day of theirs which they have been promised.
it is he who is allah in heaven and allah on earth and he is full of wisdom and knowledge.
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all between them with him is the knowledge of the hour of judgment and to him shall ye be brought back.
and those whom they invoke besides allah have no power of intercession only he who bears witness to the truth and they know him.
if thou ask them who created them they will certainly say allah how then are they deluded away from the truth
allah has knowledge of the prophetxbs cry o my lord truly these are people who will not believe
but turn away from them and say peace but soon shall they know
hamim.
by the book that makes things clear
we sent it down during a blessed night for we ever wish to warn against evil.
in the night is made distinct every affair of wisdom
by command from our presence. for we ever send revelations
as mercy from thy lord for he hears and knows all things
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all between them if ye but have an assured faith.
there is no god but he it is he who gives life and gives deathname
yet they play about in doubt.
then watch thou for the day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke or mist plainly visible
enveloping the people this will be a penalty grievous.
they will say our lord remove the penalty from us for we do really believe
how shall the message be effectual for them seeing that an messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them
yet they turn away from him and say tutored by others a man possessed
we shall indeed remove the penalty for a while but truly ye will revert to your ways.
one day we shall seize you with a mighty onslaught we will indeed then exact retribution
we did before them try the people of pharaoh there came to them a messenger most honourable
saying restore to me the servants of allah i am to you an messenger worthy of all trust
and be not arrogant as against allah for i come to you with authority manifest.
for me i have sought safety with my lord and your lord against your injuring me.
if ye believe me not at least keep yourselves away from me.
but they were aggressive then he cried to his lord these are indeed a people given to sin.
the reply came march forth with my servants by night for ye are sure to be pursued.
and leave the sea as a furrow divided for they are a host destined to be drowned.
how many were the gardens and springs they left behind
and cornfields and noble buildings
and wealth and conveniences of life wherein they had taken such delight
thus was their end and we made other people inherit those things
and neither heaven nor earth shed a tear over them nor were they given a respite again.
we did deliver aforetime the children of israel from humiliating punishment
inflicted by pharaoh for he was arrogant even among inordinate transgressors.
and we chose them aforetime above the nations knowingly
and granted them signs in which there was a manifest trial
as to these quraish they say forsooth
there is nothing beyond our first death and we shall not be raised again.
then bring back our forefathers if what ye say is true
what are they better than the people of tubba and those who were before them we destroyed them because they were guilty of sin.
we created not the heavens the earth and all between them merely in idle sport
we created them not except for just ends but most of them do not understand.
verily the day of sorting out is the time appointed for all of them
the day when no protector can avail his client in aught and no help can they receive
except such as receive allahxbs mercy for he is exalted in might most merciful.
verily the tree of zaqqum
will be the food of the sinful
like molten brass it will boil in their insides.
like the boiling of scalding water.
a voice will cry seize ye him and drag him into the midst of the blazing fire
then pour over his head the penalty of boiling water
taste thou this truly wast thou mighty full of honour
truly this is what ye used to doubt
as to the righteous they will be in a position of security
among gardens and springs
dressed in fine silk and in rich brocade they will face each other
so and we shall join them to fair women with beautiful big and lustrous eyes.
there can they call for every kind of fruit in peace and security
nor will they there taste death except the first death and he will preserve them from the penalty of the blazing fire
as a bounty from thy lord that will be the supreme achievement
verily we have made this qurxban easy in thy tongue in order that they may give heed.
so wait thou and watch for they too are waiting.
hamim.
the revelation of the book is from allah the exalted in power full of wisdom.
verily in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe.
and in the creation of yourselves and the fact that animals are scattered through the earth are signs for those of assured faith.
and in the alternation of night and day and the fact that allah sends down sustenance from the sky and revives therewith the earth after its death and in the change of the windsname
such are the signs of allah which we rehearse to thee in truth then in what exposition will they believe after rejecting allah and his signs
woe to each sinful dealer in falsehoods
he hears the signs of allah rehearsed to him yet is obstinate and lofty as if he had not heard them then announce to him a penalty grievous
and when he learns something of our signs he takes them in jest for such there will be a humiliating penalty.
in front of them is hell and of no profit to them is anything they may have earned nor any protectors they may have taken to themselves besides allah for them is a tremendous penalty.
this is true guidance and for those who reject the signs of their lord is a grievous penalty of abomination.
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you that ships may sail through it by his command that ye may seek of his bounty and that ye may be grateful.
and he has subjected to you as from him all that is in the heavens and on earth behold in that are signs indeed for those who reflect.
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not look forward to the days of allah it is for him to recompense for good or ill each people according to what they have earned.
if any one does a righteous deed it ensures to the benefit of his own soul if he does evil it works against his own soul. in the end will ye all be brought back to your lord.
we did aforetime grant to the children of israel the book the power of command and prophethood we gave them for sustenance things good and pure and we favoured them above the nations.
and we granted them clear signs in affairs of religion it was only after knowledge had been granted to them that they fell into schisms through insolent envy among themselves. verily thy lord will judge between them on the day of judgment as to those matters in which they set up differences.
then we put thee on the right way of religion so follow thou that way and follow not the desires of those who know not.
they will be of no use to thee in the sight of allah it is only wrongdoers that stand as protectors one to another but allah is the protector of the righteous.
these are clear evidences to men and a guidance and mercy to those of assured faith.
what do those who seek after evil ways think that we shall hold them equal with those who believe and do righteous deedsname
allah created the heavens and the earth for just ends and in order that each soul may find the recompense of what it has earned and none of them be wronged.
then seest thou such a one as takes as his god his own vain desire allah has knowing him as such left him astray and sealed his hearing and his heart and understanding and put a cover on his sight. who then will guide him after allah has withdrawn guidance will ye not then receive admonition
and they say what is there but our life in this world we shall die and we live and nothing but time can destroy us. but of that they have no knowledge they merely conjecture
and when our clear signs are rehearsed to them their argument is nothing but this they say bring back our forefathers if what ye say is true
say it is allah who gives you life then gives you death then he will gather you together for the day of judgment about which there is no doubt but most men do not understand.
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and the day that the hour of judgment is established that day will the dealers in falsehood perish
and thou wilt see every sect bowing the knee every sect will be called to its record this day shall ye be recompensed for all that ye did
this our record speaks about you with truth for we were wont to put on record all that ye did.
then as to those who believed and did righteous deeds their lord will admit them to his mercy that will be the achievement for all to see.
but as to those who rejected allah to them will be said were not our signs rehearsed to you but ye were arrogant and were a people given to sin
and when it was said that the promise of allah was true and that the hour there was no doubt about its coming ye used to say xbwe know not what is the hour we only think it is an idea and we have no firm assurance.xb
then will appear to them the evil fruits of what they did and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at
it will also be said this day we will forget you as ye forgot the meeting of this day of yours and your abode is the fire and no helpers have ye
this because ye used to take the signs of allah in jest and the life of the world deceived you from that day therefore they shall not be taken out thence nor shall they be received into grace.
then praise be to allah lord of the heavens and lord of the earth lord and cherisher of all the worlds
to him be glory throughout the heavens and the earth and he is exalted in power full of wisdom
hamim.
the revelation of the book is from allah the exalted in power full of wisdom.
we created not the heavens and the earth and all between them but for just ends and for a term appointed but those who reject faith turn away from that whereof they are warned.
say do ye see what it is ye invoke besides allah show me what it is they have created on earth or have they a share in the heavens bring me a book revealed before this or any remnant of knowledge ye may have if ye are telling the truth
and who is more astray than one who invokes besides allah such as will not answer him to the day of judgment and who in fact are unconscious of their call to them
and when mankind are gathered together at the resurrection they will be hostile to them and reject their worship altogether
when our clear signs are rehearsed to them the unbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them this is evident sorcery
or do they say he has forged it say had i forged it then can ye obtain no single blessing for me from allah. he knows best of that whereof ye talk so glibly enough is he for a witness between me and you and he is oftforgiving most merciful.
say i am no bringer of newfangled doctrine among the messengers nor do i know what will be done with me or with you. i follow but that which is revealed to me by inspiration i am but a warner open and clear.
say see ye if this teaching be from allah and ye reject it and a witness from among the children of israel testifies to its similarity with earlier scripture and has believed while ye are arrogant how unjust ye are truly allah guides not a people unjust.
the unbelievers say of those who believe if this message were a good thing such men would not have gone to it first before us and seeing that they guide not themselves thereby they will say this is an old falsehood
and before this was the book of moses as a guide and a mercy and this book confirms it in the arabic tongue to admonish the unjust and as glad tidings to those who do right.
verily those who say our lord is allah and remain firm on that path on them shall be no fear nor shall they grieve.
such shall be companions of the gardens dwelling therein for aye a recompense for their good deeds.
we have enjoined on man kindness to his parents in pain did his mother bear him and in pain did she give him birth. the carrying of the child to his weaning is a period of thirty months. at length when he reaches the age of full strength and attains forty years he says o my lord grant me that i may be grateful for thy favour which thou has bestowed upon me and upon both my parents and that i may work righteousness such as thou mayest approve and be gracious to me in my issue. truly have i turned to thee and truly do i bow to thee in islam.
such are they from whom we shall accept the best of their deeds and pass by their ill deeds they shall be among the companions of the garden a promise of truth which was made to them in this life.
but there is one who says to his parents fie on you do ye hold out the promise to me that i shall be raised up even though generations have passed before me without rising again and they two seek allahxbs aid and rebuke the son woe to thee have faith for the promise of allah is true. but he says this is nothing but tales of the ancients
such are they against whom is proved the sentence among the previous generations of jinns and men that have passed away for they will be utterly lost.
and to all are assigned degrees according to the deeds which they have done and in order that allah may recompense their deeds and no injustice be done to them.
and on the day that the unbelievers will be placed before the fire it will be said to them ye received your good things in the life of the world and ye took your pleasure out of them but today shall ye be recompensed with a penalty of humiliation for that ye were arrogant on earth without just cause and that ye ever transgressed.
mention hud one of xbadxbs own brethren behold he warned his people about the winding sandtracts but there have been warners before him and after him worship ye none other than allah truly i fear for you the penalty of a mighty day.
they said hast thou come in order to turn us aside from our gods then bring upon us the calamity with which thou dost threaten us if thou art telling the truth
he said the knowledge of when it will come is only with allah i proclaim to you the mission on which i have been sent but i see that ye are a people in ignorance..
then when they saw the penalty in the shape of a cloud traversing the sky coming to meet their valleys they said this cloud will give us rain nay it is the calamity ye were asking to be hastened a wind wherein is a grievous penalty
everything will it destroy by the command of its lord then by the morning they  nothing was to be seen but the ruins of their houses thus do we recompense those given to sin
and we had firmly established them in a prosperity and power which we have not given to you ye quraish and we had endowed them with faculties of hearing seeing heart and intellect but of no profit to them were their faculties of hearing sight and heart and intellect when they went on rejecting the signs of allah and they were completely encircled by that which they used to mock at
we destroyed aforetime populations round about you and we have shown the signs in various ways that they may turn to us.
why then was no help forthcoming to them from those whom they worshipped as gods besides allah as a means of access to allah nay they left them in the lurch but that was their falsehood and their invention.
behold we turned towards thee a company of jinns quietly listening to the qurxban when they stood in the presence thereof they said listen in silence when the reading was finished they returned to their people to warn them of their sins.
they said o our people we have heard a book revealed after moses confirming what came before it it guides men to the truth and to a straight path.
o our people hearken to the one who invites you to allah and believe in him he will forgive you your faults and deliver you from a penalty grievous.
if any does not hearken to the one who invites us to allah he cannot frustrate allahxbs plan on earth and no protectors can he have besides allah such men wander in manifest error.
see they not that allah who created the heavens and the earth and never wearied with their creation is able to give life to the dead yea verily he has power over all things.
and on the day that the unbelievers will be placed before the fire they will be asked is this not the truth they will say yea by our lord one will say then taste ye the penalty for that ye were wont to deny truth
therefore patiently persevere as did all messengers of inflexible purpose and be in no haste about the unbelievers. on the day that they see the punishment promised them it will be as if they had not tarried more than an hour in a single day. thine but to proclaim the message but shall any be destroyed except those who transgress
those who reject allah and hinder men from the path of allah their deeds will allah render astray from their mark.
but those who believe and work deeds of righteousness and believe in the revelation sent down to muhammad  for it is the truth from their lordname
this because those who reject allah follow vanities while those who believe follow the truth from their lord thus does allah set forth for men their lessons by similitudes.
therefore when ye meet the unbelievers in fight smite at their necks at length when ye have thoroughly subdued them bind a bond firmly on them thereafter is the time for either generosity or ransom until the war lays down its burdens. thus are ye commanded but if it had been allahxbs will he could certainly have exacted retribution from them himself but he lets you fight in order to test you some with others. but those who are slain in the way of allahname
soon will he guide them and improve their condition
and admit them to the garden which he has announced for them.
o ye who believe if ye will aid the cause of allah he will aid you and plant your feet firmly.
but those who reject allahname and allah will render their deeds astray from their mark.
that is because they hate the revelation of allah so he has made their deeds fruitless.
do they not travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before them who did evil allah brought utter destruction on them and similar fates await those who reject allah.
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe but those who reject allah have no protector.
verily allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow while those who reject allah will enjoy this world and eat as cattle eat and the fire will be their abode.
and how many cities with more power than thy city which has driven thee out have we destroyed for their sins and there was none to aid them.
is then one who is on a clear path from his lord no better than one to whom the evil of his conduct seems pleasing and such as follow their own lusts
here is a parable of the garden which the righteous are promised in it are rivers of water incorruptible rivers of milk of which the taste never changes rivers of wine a joy to those who drink and rivers of honey pure and clear. in it there are for them all kinds of fruits and grace from their lord. can those in such bliss be compared to such as shall dwell for ever in the fire and be given to drink boiling water so that it cuts up their bowels to pieces
and among them are men who listen to thee but in the end when they go out from thee they say to those who have received knowledge what is it he said just then such are men whose hearts allah has sealed and who follow their own lusts.
but to those who receive guidance he increases the light of guidance and bestows on them their piety and restraint from evil.
do they then only wait for the hourname and when it actually is on them how can they benefit then by their admonition
know therefore that there is no god but allah and ask forgiveness for thy fault and for the men and women who believe for allah knows how ye move about and how ye dwell in your homes.
those who believe say why is not a sura sent down for us but when a sura of basic or categorical meaning is revealed and fighting is mentioned therein thou wilt see those in whose hearts is a disease looking at thee with a look of one in swoon at the approach of death. but more fitting for them
were it to obey and say what is just and when a matter is resolved on it were best for them if they were true to allah.
then is it to be expected of you if ye were put in authority that ye will do mischief in the land and break your ties of kith and kin
such are the men whom allah has cursed for he has made them deaf and blinded their sight.
do they not then earnestly seek to understand the qurxban or are their hearts locked up by them
those who turn back as apostates after guidance was clearly shown to them the evil one has instigated them and busied them up with false hopes.
this because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed we will obey you in part of this matter but allah knows their inner secrets.
but how will it be when the angels take their souls at death and smite their faces and their backs
this because they followed that which called forth the wrath of allah and they hated allahxbs good pleasure so he made their deeds of no effect.
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not bring to light all their rancour
had we so wiled we could have shown them up to thee and thou shouldst have known them by their marks but surely thou wilt know them by the tone of their speech and allah knows all that ye do.
and we shall try you until we test those among you who strive their utmost and persevere in patience and we shall try your reported mettle.
those who reject allah hinder men from the path of allah and resist the messenger after guidance has been clearly shown to them will not injure allah in the least but he will make their deeds of no effect.
o ye who believe obey allah and obey the messenger and make not vain your deeds
those who reject allah and hinder men from the path of allah then die rejecting allahname
be not weary and fainthearted crying for peace when ye should be uppermost for allah is with you and will never put you in loss for your good deeds.
the life of this world is but play and amusement and if ye believe and guard against evil he will grant you your recompense and will not ask you to give up your possessions.
if he were to ask you for all of them and press you ye would covetously withhold and he would bring out all your illfeeling.
behold ye are those invited to spend of your substance in the way of allah but among you are some that are niggardly. but any who are niggardly are so at the expense of their own souls. but allah is free of all wants and it is ye that are needy. if ye turn back from the path he will substitute in your stead another people then they would not be like you
verily we have granted thee a manifest victory
that allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those to follow fulfil his favour to thee and guide thee on the straight way
and that allah may help thee with powerful help.
it is he who sent down tranquillity into the hearts of the believers that they may add faith to their faith for to allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth and allah is full of knowledge and wisdom
that he may admit the men and women who believe to gardens beneath which rivers flow to dwell therein for aye and remove their ills from them and that is in the sight of allah the highest achievement for man
and that he may punish the hypocrites men and women and the polytheists men and women who imagine an evil opinion of allah. on them is a round of evil the wrath of allah is on them he has cursed them and got hell ready for them and evil is it for a destination.
for to allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth and allah is exalted in power full of wisdom.
we have truly sent thee as a witness as a bringer of glad tidings and as a warner
in order that ye o men may believe in allah and his messenger that ye may assist and honour him and celebrate his praise morning and evening.
verily those who plight their fealty to thee do no less than plight their fealty to allah the hand of allah is over their hands then any one who violates his oath does so to the harm of his own soul and any one who fulfils what he has covenanted with allahname
the desert arabs who lagged behind will say to thee we were engaged in looking after our flocks and herds and our families do thou then ask forgiveness for us. they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. say who then has any power at all to intervene on your behalf with allah if his will is to give you some loss or to give you some profit but allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.
nay ye thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families this seemed pleasing in your hearts and ye conceived an evil thought for ye are a people lost in wickedness.
and if any believe not in allah and his messenger we have prepared for those who reject allah a blazing fire
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth he forgives whom he wills and he punishes whom he wills but allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
those who lagged behind will say when ye are free to march and take booty in war permit us to follow you. they wish to change allahxbs decree say not thus will ye follow us allah has already declared this beforehand then they will say but ye are jealous of us. nay but little do they understand such things.
say to the desert arabs who lagged behind ye shall be summoned to fight against a people given to vehement war then shall ye fight or they shall submit. then if ye show obedience allah will grant you a goodly reward but if ye turn back as ye did before he will punish you with a grievous penalty.
no blame is there on the blind nor is there blame on the lame nor on one ill if he joins not the war but he that obeys allah and his messenger allah will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow and he who turns back allah will punish him with a grievous penalty.
allahxbs good pleasure was on the believers when they swore fealty to thee under the tree he knew what was in their hearts and he sent down tranquillity to them and he rewarded them with a speedy victory
and many gains will they acquire besides and allah is exalted in power full of wisdom.
allah has promised you many gains that ye shall acquire and he has given you these beforehand and he has restrained the hands of men from you that it may be a sign for the believers and that he may guide you to a straight path
and other gains there are which are not within your power but which allah has compassed and allah has power over all things.
if the unbelievers should fight you they would certainly turn their backs then would they find neither protector nor helper.
such has been the practice approved of allah already in the past no change wilt thou find in the practice approved of allah.
and it is he who has restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of makka after that he gave you the victory over them. and allah sees well all that ye do.
they are the ones who denied revelation and hindered you from the sacred mosque and the sacrificial animals detained from reaching their place of sacrifice. had there not been believing men and believing women whom ye did not know that ye were trampling down and on whose account a crime would have accrued to you without your knowledge allah would have allowed you to force your way but he held back your hands that he may admit to his mercy whom he will. if they had been apart we should certainly have punished the unbelievers among them with a grievous punishment.
while the unbelievers got up in their hearts heat and cant  the heat and cant of ignorancename and made them stick close to the command of selfrestraint and well were they entitled to it and worthy of it. and allah has full knowledge of all things.
truly did allah fulfil the vision for his messenger ye shall enter the sacred mosque if allah wills with minds secure heads shaved hair cut short and without fear. for he knew what ye knew not and he granted besides this a speedy victory.
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to proclaim it over all religion and enough is allah for a witness.
muhammad is the messenger of allah and those who are with him are strong against unbelievers but compassionate amongst each other. thou wilt see them bow and prostrate themselves in prayer seeking grace from allah and his good pleasure. on their faces are their marks being the traces of their prostration. this is their similitude in the taurat and their similitude in the gospel is like a seed which sends forth its blade then makes it strong it then becomes thick and it stands on its own stem filling the sowers with wonder and delight. as a result it fills the unbelievers with rage at them. allah has promised those among them who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward.
o ye who believe put not yourselves forward before allah and his messenger but fear allah for allah is he who hears and knows all things.
o ye who believe raise not your voices above the voice of the prophet nor speak aloud to him in talk as ye may speak aloud to one another lest your deeds become vain and ye perceive not.
those that lower their voices in the presence of allahxbs messengername
those who shout out to thee from without the inner apartments  most of them lack understanding.
if only they had patience until thou couldst come out to them it would be best for them but allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o ye who believe if a wicked person comes to you with any news ascertain the truth lest ye harm people unwittingly and afterwards become full of repentance for what ye have done.
and know that among you is allahxbs messenger were he in many matters to follow your wishes ye would certainly fall into misfortune but allah has endeared the faith to you and has made it beautiful in your hearts and he has made hateful to you unbelief wickedness and rebellion such indeed are those who walk in righteousness
a grace and favour from allah and allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
if two parties among the believers fall into a quarrel make ye peace between them but if one of them transgresses beyond bounds against the other then fight ye all against the one that transgresses until it complies with the command of allah but if it complies then make peace between them with justice and be fair for allah loves those who are fair and just.
the believers are but a single brotherhood so make peace and reconciliation between your two contending brothers and fear allah that ye may receive mercy.
o ye who believe let not some men among you laugh at others it may be that the latter are better than the former nor let some women laugh at others it may be that the latter are better than the former nor defame nor be sarcastic to each other nor call each other by offensive nicknames illseeming is a name connoting wickedness to be used of one after he has believed and those who do not desist are indeed doing wrong.
o ye who believe avoid suspicion as much as possible for suspicion in some cases is a sin and spy not on each other behind their backs. would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother nay ye would abhor it...but fear allah for allah is oftreturning most merciful.
o mankind we created you from a single pair of a male and a female and made you into nations and tribes that ye may know each other not that ye may despise each other. verily the most honoured of you in the sight of allah is he who is the most righteous of you. and allah has full knowledge and is well acquainted with all things.
the desert arabs say we believe. say ye have no faith but ye onlysay xbwe have submitted our wills to allahxb for not yet has faith entered your hearts. but if ye obey allah and his messenger he will not belittle aught of your deeds for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
only those are believers who have believed in allah and his messenger and have never since doubted but have striven with their belongings and their persons in the cause of allah such are the sincere ones.
say what will ye instruct allah about your religion but allah knows all that is in the heavens and on earth he has full knowledge of all things.
they impress on thee as a favour that they have embraced islam. say count not your islam as a favour upon me nay allah has conferred a favour upon you that he has guided you to the faith if ye be true and sincere.
verily allah knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth and allah sees well all that ye do.
qaf by the glorious qurxban thou art allahxbs messenger.
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves. so the unbelievers say this is a wonderful thing
what when we die and become dust shall we live again that is a sort of return far from our understanding.
we already know how much of them the earth takes away with us is a record guarding the full account.
but they deny the truth when it comes to them so they are in a confused state.
do they not look at the sky above them how we have made it and adorned it and there are no flaws in it
and the earth we have spread it out and set thereon mountains standing firm and produced therein every kind of beautiful growth in pairs
to be observed and commemorated by every devotee turning to allah.
and we send down from the sky rain charted with blessing and we produce therewith gardens and grain for harvests
and tall and stately palmtrees with shoots of fruitstalks piled one over another
as sustenance for allahxbs servants and we give new life therewith to land that is dead thus will be the resurrection.
before them was denied the hereafter by the people of noah the companions of the rass the thamud
the xbad pharaoh the brethren of lut
the companions of the wood and the people of tubbaxb each one of them rejected the messengers and my warning was duly fulfilled in them.
were we then weary with the first creation that they should be in confused doubt about a new creation
it was we who created man and we know what dark suggestions his soul makes to him for we are nearer to him than his jugular vein.
behold two guardian angels appointed to learn his doings learn and noted them one sitting on the right and one on the left.
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him ready to note it.
and the stupor of death will bring truth before his eyes this was the thing which thou wast trying to escape
and the trumpet shall be blown that will be the day whereof warning had been given.
and there will come forth every soul with each will be an angel to drive and an angel to bear witness.
it will be said thou wast heedless of this now have we removed thy veil and sharp is thy sight this day
and his companion will say here is his record ready with me
the sentence will be throw throw into hell every contumacious rejecter of allah
who forbade what was good transgressed all bounds cast doubts and suspicions
who set up another god beside allah throw him into a severe penalty.
his companion will say our lord i did not make him transgress but he was himself far astray.
he will say dispute not with each other in my presence i had already in advance sent you warning.
the word changes not before me and i do not the least injustice to my servants.
one day we will ask hell art thou filled to the full it will say are there any more to come
and the garden will be brought nigh to the righteousname
a voice will say this is what was promised for youname who kept his law
who feared allah most gracious unseen and brought a heart turned in devotion to him
enter ye therein in peace and security this is a day of eternal life
there will be for them therein all that they wishname
but how many generations before them did we destroy for their sins stronger in power than they then did they wander through the land was there any place of escape for them
verily in this is a message for any that has a heart and understanding or who gives ear and earnestly witnesses the truth.
we created the heavens and the earth and all between them in six days nor did any sense of weariness touch us.
bear then with patience all that they say and celebrate the praises of thy lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting.
and during part of the night also celebrate his praises and so likewise after the postures of adoration.
and listen for the day when the caller will call out from a place quiet near
the day when they will hear a mighty blast in very truth that will be the day of resurrection.
verily it is we who give life and death and to us is the final goal
the day when the earth will be rent asunder from men hurrying out that will be a gathering togethername
we know best what they say and thou art not one to overawe them by force. so admonish with the qurxban such as fear my warning
by the winds that scatter broadcast
and those that lift and bear away heavy weights
and those that flow with ease and gentleness
and those that distribute and apportion by command
verily that which ye are promised is true
and verily judgment and justice must indeed come to pass.
by the sky with its numerous paths
truly ye are in a doctrine discordant
through which are deluded away from the truth such as would be deluded.
woe to the falsehoodmongers
those who flounder heedless in a flood of confusion
they ask when will be the day of judgment and justice
it will be a day when they will be tried and tested over the fire
taste ye your trial this is what ye used to ask to be hastened
as to the righteous they will be in the midst of gardens and springs
taking joy in the things which their lord gives them because before then they lived a good life.
they were in the habit of sleeping but little by night
and in the hour of early dawn they were found praying for forgiveness
and in their wealth and possessions was remembered the right of the needy him who asked and him who for some reason was prevented from asking.
on the earth are signs for those of assured faith
as also in your own selves will ye not then see
and in heaven is your sustenance as also that which ye are promised.
then by the lord of heaven and earth this is the very truth as much as the fact that ye can speak intelligently to each other.
has the story reached thee of the honoured guests of abraham
behold they entered his presence and said peace he said peace and thought these seem unusual people.
then he turned quickly to his household brought out a fatted calf
and placed it before them.. he said will ye not eat
when they did not eat he conceived a fear of them. they said fear not and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge.
but his wife came forward laughing aloud she smote her forehead and said a barren old woman
they said even so has thy lord spoken and he is full of wisdom and knowledge.
abraham said and what o ye messengers is your errand now
they said we have been sent to a people deep in sin
to bring on on them a shower of stones of clay brimstone
marked as from thy lord for those who trespass beyond bounds.
then we evacuated those of the believers who were there
but we found not there any just muslim persons except in one house
and we left there a sign for such as fear the grievous penalty.
and in moses was another sign behold we sent him to pharaoh with authority manifest.
but pharaoh turned back with his chiefs and said a sorcerer or one possessed
so we took him and his forces and threw them into the sea and his was the blame.
and in the xbad people was another sign behold we sent against them the devastating wind
it left nothing whatever that it came up against but reduced it to ruin and rottenness.
and in the thamud was another sign behold they were told enjoy your brief day for a little while
but they insolently defied the command of their lord so the stunning noise of an earthquake seized them even while they were looking on.
then they could not even stand on their feet nor could they help themselves.
so were the people of noah before them for they wickedly transgressed.
with power and skill did we construct the firmament for it is we who create the vastness of pace.
and we have spread out the spacious earth how excellently we do spread out
and of every thing we have created pairs that ye may receive instruction.
hasten ye then at once to allah i am from him a warner to you clear and open
and make not another an object of worship with allah i am from him a warner to you clear and open
similarly no messenger came to the peoples before them but they said of him in like manner a sorcerer or one possessed
is this the legacy they have transmitted one to another nay they are themselves a people transgressing beyond bounds
so turn away from them not thine is the blame.
but teach thy message for teaching benefits the believers.
i have only created jinns and men that they may serve me.
no sustenance do i require of them nor do i require that they should feed me.
for allah is he who gives all sustenancename steadfast for ever.
for the wrongdoers their portion is like unto the portion of their fellows of earlier generations then let them not ask me to hasten that portion
woe then to the unbelievers on account of that day of theirs which they have been promised
by the mount of revelation
by a decree inscribed
in a scroll unfolded
by the muchfrequented fane
by the canopy raised high
and by the ocean filled with swell
verily the doom of thy lord will indeed come to pass
there is none can avert it
on the day when the firmament will be in dreadful commotion.
and the mountains will fly hither and thither.
then woe that day to those that treat truth as falsehood
that play and paddle in shallow trifles.
that day shall they be thrust down to the fire of hell irresistibly.
this it will be said is the fire which ye were wont to deny
is this then a fake or is it ye that do not see
burn ye therein the same is it to you whether ye bear it with patience or not ye but receive the recompense of your own deeds.
as to the righteous they will be in gardens and in happiness
enjoying the bliss which their lord hath bestowed on them and their lord shall deliver them from the penalty of the fire.
to them will be said eat and drink ye with profit and health because of your good deeds.
they will recline with ease on thrones of dignity arranged in ranks and we shall join them to companions with beautiful big and lustrous eyes.
and those who believe and whose families follow them in faithname
and we shall bestow on them of fruit and meat anything they shall desire.
they shall there exchange one with another a loving cup free of frivolity free of all taint of ill.
round about them will serve devoted to them young male servants handsome as pearls wellguarded.
they will advance to each other engaging in mutual enquiry.
they will say aforetime we were not without fear for the sake of our people.
but allah has been good to us and has delivered us from the penalty of the scorching wind.
truly we did call unto him from of old truly it is he the beneficent the merciful
therefore proclaim thou the praises of thy lord for by the grace of thy lord thou art no vulgar soothsayer nor art thou one possessed.
or do they say a poet we await for him some calamity hatched by time
say thou await ye i too will wait along with you
is it that their faculties of understanding urge them to this or are they but a people transgressing beyond bounds
or do they say he fabricated the message nay they have no faith
let them then produce a recital like unto it if it be they speak the truth
were they created of nothing or were they themselves the creators
or did they create the heavens and the earth nay they have no firm belief.
or are the treasures of thy lord with them or are they the managers of affairs
or have they a ladder by which they can climb up to heaven and listen to its secrets then let such a listener of theirs produce a manifest proof.
or has he only daughters and ye have sons
or is it that thou dost ask for a reward so that they are burdened with a load of debt
or that the unseen in it their hands and they write it down
or do they intend a plot against thee but those who defy allah are themselves involved in a plot
or have they a god other than allah exalted is allah far above the things they associate with him
were they to see a piece of the sky falling on them they would only say clouds gathered in heaps
so leave them alone until they encounter that day of theirs wherein they shall perforce swoon with terror
the day when their plotting will avail them nothing and no help shall be given them.
and verily for those who do wrong there is another punishment besides this but most of them understand not.
now await in patience the command of thy lord for verily thou art in our eyes and celebrate the praises of thy lord the while thou standest forth
and for part of the night also praise thou him and at the retreat of the stars
by the star when it goes down
your companion is neither astray nor being misled.
nor does he say aught of his own desire.
it is no less than inspiration sent down to him
he was taught by one mighty in power
endued with wisdom for he appeared in stately form
while he was in the highest part of the horizon
then he approached and came closer
and was at a distance of but two bowlengths or even nearer
so did allah convey the inspiration to his servant conveyed what he meant to convey.
the prophetxbs mind and heart in no way falsified that which he saw.
will ye then dispute with him concerning what he saw
for indeed he saw him at a second descent
near the lotetree beyond which none may pass
near it is the garden of abode.
behold the lotetree was shrouded in mystery unspeakable
his sight never swerved nor did it go wrong
for truly did he see of the signs of his lord the greatest
have ye seen lat. and xbuzza
and another the third goddess manat
what for you the male sex and for him the female
behold such would be indeed a division most unfair
these are nothing but names which ye have devisedname for which allah has sent down no authority whatever. they follow nothing but conjecture and what their own souls desire even though there has already come to them guidance from their lord
nay shall man have just anything he hankers after
but it is to allah that the end and the beginning of all things belong.
how manysoever be the angels in the heavens their intercession will avail nothing except after allah has given leave for whom he pleases and that he is acceptable to him.
those who believe not in the hereafter name the angels with female names.
but they have no knowledge therein. they follow nothing but conjecture and conjecture avails nothing against truth.
therefore shun those who turn away from our message and desire nothing but the life of this world.
that is as far as knowledge will reach them. verily thy lord knoweth best those who stray from his path and he knoweth best those who receive guidance.
yea to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth so that he rewards those who do evil according to their deeds and he rewards those who do good with what is best.
those who avoid great sins and shameful deeds only falling into small faultsname and when ye are hidden in your mothersxb wombs. therefore justify not yourselves he knows best who it is that guards against evil.
seest thou one who turns back
gives a little then hardens his heart
what has he knowledge of the unseen so that he can see
nay is he not acquainted with what is in the books of moses
and of abraham who fulfilled his engagements
namely that no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another
that man can have nothing but what he strives for
that the fruit of his striving will soon come in sight
then will he be rewarded with a reward complete
that to thy lord is the final goal
that it is he who granteth laughter and tears
that it is he who granteth death and life
that he did create in pairsname
from a seed when lodged in its place
that he hath promised a second creation raising of the dead
that it is he who giveth wealth and satisfaction
that he is the lord of sirius the mighty star
and that it is he who destroyed the powerful ancient xbad people
and the thamud nor gave them a lease of perpetual life.
and before them the people of noah for that they were all most unjust and most insolent transgressors
and he destroyed the overthrown cities of sodom and gomorrah.
so that ruins unknown have covered them up.
then which of the gifts of thy lord o man wilt thou dispute about
this is a warner of the series of warners of old
the judgment ever approaching draws nigh
no soul but allah can lay it bare.
do ye then wonder at this recital
and will ye laugh and not weep
wasting your time in vanities
but fall ye down in prostration to allah and adore him
the hour of judgment is nigh and the moon is cleft asunder.
but if they see a sign they turn away and say this is but transient magic.
they reject the warning and follow their own lusts but every matter has its appointed time.
there have already come to them recitals wherein there is enough to check them
mature wisdom but the preaching of warners profits them not.
therefore o prophet turn away from them. the day that the caller will call them to a terrible affair
they will come forthname torpid like locusts scattered abroad
hastening with eyes transfixed towards the caller hard is this day the unbelievers will say.
before them the people of noah rejected their messenger they rejected our servant and said here is one possessed and he was driven out.
then he called on his lord i am one overcome do thou then help me
so we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth.
and we caused the earth to gush forth with springs so the waters met and rose to the extent decreed.
but we bore him on an ark made of broad planks and caulked with palmfibre
she floats under our eyes and care a recompense to one who had been rejected with scorn
and we have left this as a sign for all time then is there any that will receive admonition
but how terrible was my penalty and my warning
and we have indeed made the qurxban easy to understand and remember then is there any that will receive admonition
the xbad people too rejected truth then how terrible was my penalty and my warning
for we sent against them a furious wind on a day of violent disaster
plucking out men as if they were roots of palmtrees torn up from the ground.
yea how terrible was my penalty and my warning
but we have indeed made the qurxban easy to understand and remember then is there any that will receive admonition
the thamud also rejected their warners.
for they said what a man a solitary one from among ourselves shall we follow such a one truly should we then be straying in mind and mad
is it that the message is sent to him of all people amongst us nay he is a liar an insolent one
ah they will know on the morrow which is the liar the insolent one
for we will send the shecamel by way of trial for them. so watch them o salih and possess thyself in patience
and tell them that the water is to be divided between them each onexbs right to drink being brought forward by suitable turns.
but they called to their companion and he took a sword in hand and hamstrung her.
ah how terrible was my penalty and my warning
for we sent against them a single mighty blast and they became like the dry stubble used by one who pens cattle.
and we have indeed made the qurxban easy to understand and remember then is there any that will receive admonition
the people of lut rejected his warning.
we sent against them a violent tornado with showers of stones which destroyed them except lutxbs household them we delivered by early dawn
as a grace from us thus do we reward those who give thanks.
and lut did warn them of our punishment but they disputed about the warning.
and they even sought to snatch away his guests from him but we blinded their eyes. they heard now taste ye my wrath and my warning.
early on the morrow an abiding punishment seized them
so taste ye my wrath and my warning.
and we have indeed made the qurxban easy to understand and remember then is there any that will receive admonition
to the people of pharaoh too aforetime came warners from allah.
the people rejected all our signs but we seized them with such penalty as comes from one exalted in power able to carry out his will.
are your unbelievers o quraish better than they or have ye an immunity in the sacred books
or do they say we acting together can defend ourselves
soon will their multitude be put to flight and they will show their backs.
nay the hour of judgment is the time promised them for their full recompense and that hour will be most grievous and most bitter.
truly those in sin are the ones straying in mind and mad.
the day they will be dragged through the fire on their faces they will hear taste ye the touch of hell
verily all things have we created in proportion and measure.
and our command is but a single actname
and oft in the past have we destroyed gangs like unto you then is there any that will receive admonition
all that they do is noted in their books of deeds
every matter small and great is on record.
as to the righteous they will be in the midst of gardens and rivers
in an assembly of truth in the presence of a sovereign omnipotent.
allah most gracious
it is he who has taught the qurxban.
he has created man
he has taught him speech and intelligence.
the sun and the moon follow courses exactly computed
and the herbs and the trees  both alike prostrate in adoration.
and the firmament has he raised high and he has set up the balance of justice
in order that ye may not transgress due balance.
so establish weight with justice and fall not short in the balance.
it is he who has spread out the earth for his creatures
therein is fruit and datepalms producing spathes enclosing dates
also corn with its leaves and stalk for fodder and sweetsmelling plants.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
he created man from sounding clay like unto pottery
and he created jinns from fire free of smoke
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
he is lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
he has let free the two bodies of flowing water meeting together
between them is a barrier which they do not transgress
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
out of them come pearls and coral
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
and his are the ships sailing smoothly through the seas lofty as mountains
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
all that is on earth will perish
but will abide for ever the face of thy lordname bounty and honour.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
of him seeks its need every creature in the heavens and on earth every day in new splendour doth he shine
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
soon shall we settle your affairs o both ye worlds
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
o ye assembly of jinns and men if it be ye can pass beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth pass ye not without authority shall ye be able to pass
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
on you will be sent o ye evil ones twain a flame of fire to burn and a smoke to choke no defence will ye have
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
when the sky is rent asunder and it becomes red like ointment
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
on that day no question will be asked of man or jinn as to his sin.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
for the sinners will be known by their marks and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
this is the hell which the sinners deny
in its midst and in the midst of boiling hot water will they wander round
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
but for such as fear the time when they will stand before the judgment seat of their lord there will be two gardens
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
containing all kinds of trees and delights
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
in them each will be two springs flowing free
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
in them will be fruits of every kind two and two.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
they will recline on carpets whose inner linings will be of rich brocade the fruit of the gardens will be near and easy of reach.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
in them will be maidens chaste restraining their glances whom no man or jinn before them has touched
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
like unto rubies and coral.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
is there any reward for good  other than good
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
and besides these two there are two other gardens
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
darkgreen in colour from plentiful watering.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
in them each will be two springs pouring forth water in continuous abundance
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
in them will be fruits and dates and pomegranates
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
in them will be fair companions good beautiful
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
companions restrained as to their glances in goodly pavilions
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
whom no man or jinn before them has touched
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
reclining on green cushions and rich carpets of beauty.
then which of the favours of your lord will ye deny
blessed be the name of thy lord full of majesty bounty and honour.
when the event inevitable cometh to pass
then will no soul entertain falsehood concerning its coming.
many will it bring low many will it exalt
when the earth shall be shaken to its depths
and the mountains shall be crumbled to atoms
becoming dust scattered abroad
and ye shall be sorted out into three classes.
then there will be the companions of the right hand what will be the companions of the right hand
and the companions of the left handname
and those foremost in faith will be foremost in the hereafter.
these will be those nearest to allah
in gardens of bliss
a number of people from those of old
and a few from those of later times.
they will be on thrones encrusted with gold and precious stones
reclining on them facing each other.
round about them will serve youths of perpetual freshness
with goblets shining beakers and cups filled out of clearflowing fountains
no afterache will they receive therefrom nor will they suffer intoxication
and with fruits any that they may select
and the flesh of fowls any that they may desire.
and there will be companions with beautiful big and lustrous eyes
like unto pearls wellguarded.
a reward for the deeds of their past life.
not frivolity will they hear therein nor any taint of ill
only the saying peace peace.
the companions of the right handname
they will be among lotetrees without thorns
among talh trees with flowers or fruits piled one above another
in shade longextended
by water flowing constantly
and fruit in abundance.
whose season is not limited nor supply forbidden
and on thrones of dignity raised high.
we have created their companions of special creation.
and made them virgin  pure and undefiled 
beloved by nature equal in age
for the companions of the right hand.
a goodly number from those of old
and a goodly number from those of later times.
the companions of the left handname
they will be in the midst of a fierce blast of fire and in boiling water
and in the shades of black smoke
nothing will there be to refresh nor to please
for that they were wont to be indulged before that in wealth and luxury
and persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme
and they used to say what when we die and become dust and bones shall we then indeed be raised up again
we and our fathers of old
say yea those of old and those of later times
all will certainly be gathered together for the meeting appointed for a day wellknown.
then will ye trulyname and treat truth as falsehood
ye will surely taste of the tree of zaqqum.
then will ye fill your insides therewith
and drink boiling water on top of it
indeed ye shall drink like diseased camels raging with thirst
such will be their entertainment on the day of requital
it is we who have created you why will ye not witness the truth
do ye then see the human seed that ye throw out
is it ye who create it or are we the creators
we have decreed death to be your common lot and we are not to be frustrated
from changing your forms and creating you again in forms that ye know not.
and ye certainly know already the first form of creation why then do ye not celebrate his praises
see ye the seed that ye sow in the ground
is it ye that cause it to grow or are we the cause
were it our will we could crumble it to dry powder and ye would be left in wonderment
saying we are indeed left with debts for nothing
indeed are we shut out of the fruits of our labour
see ye the water which ye drink
do ye bring it down in rain from the cloud or do we
were it our will we could make it salt and unpalatable then why do ye not give thanks
see ye the fire which ye kindle
is it ye who grow the tree which feeds the fire or do we grow it
we have made it a memorial of our handiwork and an article of comfort and convenience for the denizens of deserts.
then celebrate with praises the name of thy lord the supreme
furthermore i call to witness the setting of the stars
and that is indeed a mighty adjuration if ye but knew
that this is indeed a qurxban most honourable
in book wellguarded
which none shall touch but those who are clean
a revelation from the lord of the worlds.
is it such a message that ye would hold in light esteem
and have ye made it your livelihood that ye should declare it false
then why do ye not intervene when the soul of the dying man reaches the throat
and ye the while sit looking on
but we are nearer to him than ye and yet see not
then why do ye notname
call back the soul if ye are true in the claim of independence
thus then if he be of those nearest to allah
there is for him rest and satisfaction and a garden of delights.
and if he be of the companions of the right hand
for him is the salutation peace be unto thee from the companions of the right hand.
and if he be of those who treat truth as falsehood who go wrong
for him is entertainment with boiling water.
and burning in hellfire.
verily this is the very truth and certainly.
so celebrate with praises the name of thy lord the supreme.
whatever is in the heavens and on earthname the wise.
to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth it is he who gives life and death and he has power over all things.
he is the first and the last the evident and the immanent and he has full knowledge of all things.
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days and is moreover firmly established on the throne of authority. he knows what enters within the earth and what comes forth out of it what comes down from heaven and what mounts up to it. and he is with you wheresoever ye may be. and allah sees well all that ye do.
to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all affairs are referred back to allah.
he merges night into day and he merges day into night and he has full knowledge of the secrets of all hearts.
believe in allah and his messenger and spend in charity out of the substance whereof he has made you heirs. for those of you who believe and spend in charityname
what cause have ye why ye should not believe in allah and the messenger invites you to believe in your lord and has indeed taken your covenant if ye are men of faith.
he is the one who sends to his servant manifest signs that he may lead you from the depths of darkness into the light and verily allah is to you most kind and merciful.
and what cause have ye why ye should not spend in the cause of allah for to allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth. not equal among you are those who spent freely and fought before the victory with those who did so later. those are higher in rank than those who spent freely and fought afterwards. but to all has allah promised a goodly reward. and allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.
who is he that will loan to allah a beautiful loan for allah will increase it manifold to his credit and he will have besides a liberal reward.
one day shalt thou see the believing men and the believing women how their light runs forward before them and by their right hands their greeting will be good news for you this day gardens beneath which flow rivers to dwell therein for aye this is indeed the highest achievement
one day will the hypocrites men and women  say to the believers wait for us let us borrow a light from your light it will be said turn ye back to your rear then seek a light where ye can so a wall will be put up betwixt them with a gate therein. within it will be mercy throughout and without it all alongside will be wrath and punishment
those without will call out were we not with you the others will reply true but ye led yourselves into temptation ye looked forward to our ruin ye doubted allahxbs promise and your false desires deceived you until there issued the command of allah. and the deceiver deceived you in respect of allah.
this day shall no ransom be accepted of you nor of those who rejected allah. your abode is the fire that is the proper place to claim you and an evil refuge it is
has not the time arrived for the believers that their hearts in all humility should engage in the remembrance of allah and of the truth which has been revealed to them and that they should not become like those to whom was given revelation aforetime but long ages passed over them and their hearts grew hard for many among them are rebellious transgressors.
know ye all that allah giveth life to the earth after its death already have we shown the signs plainly to you that ye may learn wisdom.
for those who give in charity men and women and loan to allah a beautiful loan it shall be increased manifold to their credit and they shall have besides a liberal reward.
and those who believe in allah and his messengers they are the sincere lovers of truth and the witnesses who testify in the eyes of their lord they shall have their reward and their light. but those who reject allah and deny our signsname
know ye all that the life of this world is but play and amusement pomp and mutual boasting and multiplying in rivalry among yourselves riches and children. here is a similitude how rain and the growth which it brings forth delight the hearts of the tillers soon it withers thou wilt see it grow yellow then it becomes dry and crumbles away. but in the hereafter is a penalty severe for the devotees of wrong. and forgiveness from allah and his good pleasure for the devotees of allah. and what is the life of this world but goods and chattels of deception
be ye foremost in seeking forgiveness from your lord and a garden of bliss the width whereof is as the width of heaven and earth prepared for those who believe in allah and his messengers that is the grace of allah which he bestows on whom he pleases and allah is the lord of grace abounding.
no misfortune can happen on earth or in your souls but is recorded in a decree before we bring it into existence that is truly easy for allah
in order that ye may not despair over matters that pass you by nor exult over favours bestowed upon you. for allah loveth not any vainglorious boaster
such persons as are covetous and commend covetousness to men. and if any turn back from allahxbs way verily allah is free of all needs worthy of all praise.
we sent aforetime our messengers with clear signs and sent down with them the book and the balance of right and wrong that men may stand forth in justice and we sent down iron in which is material for mighty war as well as many benefits for mankind that allah may test who it is that will help unseen him and his messengers for allah is full of strength exalted in might and able to enforce his will.
and we sent noah and abraham and established in their line prophethood and revelation and some of them were on right guidance. but many of them became rebellious transgressors.
then in their wake we followed them up with others of our messengers we sent after them jesus the son of mary and bestowed on him the gospel and we ordained in the hearts of those who followed him compassion and mercy. but the monasticism which they invented for themselves we did not prescribe for them we commanded only the seeking for the good pleasure of allah but that they did not foster as they should have done. yet we bestowed on those among them who believed their due reward but many of them are rebellious transgressors.
o ye that believe fear allah and believe in his messenger and he will bestow on you a double portion of his mercy he will provide for you a light by which ye shall walk straight in your path and he will forgive you your past for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
that the people of the book may know that they have no power whatever over the grace of allah that his grace is entirely in his hand to bestow it on whomsoever he wills. for allah is the lord of grace abounding.
allah has indeed heard and accepted the statement of the woman who pleads with thee concerning her husband and carries her complaint in prayer to allah and allah always hears the arguments between both sides among you for allah hears and sees all things.
if any men among you divorce their wives by zihar calling them mothers they cannot be their mothers none can be their mothers except those who gave them birth. and in fact they use words both iniquitous and false but truly allah is one that blots out sins and forgives again and again.
but those who divorce their wives by zihar then wish to go back on the words they utteredname
and if any has not the wherewithal he should fast for two months consecutively before they touch each other. but if any is unable to do so he should feed sixty indigent ones this that ye may show your faith in allah and his messenger. those are limits set by allah. for those who reject him there is a grievous penalty.
those who resist allah and his messenger will be humbled to dust as were those before them for we have already sent down clear signs. and the unbelievers will have a humiliating penalty
on the day that allah will raise them all up again and show them the truth and meaning of their conduct. allah has reckoned its value though they may have forgotten it for allah is witness to all things.
seest thou not that allah doth know all that is in the heavens and on earth there is not a secret consultation between three but he makes the fourth among them  nor between five but he makes the sixthname but he is in their midst wheresoever they be in the end will he tell them the truth of their conduct on the day of judgment. for allah has full knowledge of all things.
turnest thou not thy sight towards those who were forbidden secret counsels yet revert to that which they were forbidden to do and they hold secret counsels among themselves for iniquity and hostility and disobedience to the messenger. and when they come to thee they salute thee not as allah salutes thee but in crooked ways and they say to themselves why does not allah punish us for our words enough for them is hell in it will they burn and evil is that destination
o ye who believe when ye hold secret counsel do it not for iniquity and hostility and disobedience to the prophet but do it for righteousness and selfrestraint and fear allah to whom ye shall be brought back.
secret counsels are only inspired by the evil one in order that he may cause grief to the believers but he cannot harm them in the least except as allah permits and on allah let the believers put their trust.
o ye who believe when ye are told to make room in the assemblies spread out and make room ample room will allah provide for you. and when ye are told to rise up rise up allah will rise up to suitable ranks and degrees those of you who believe and who have been granted mystic knowledge. and allah is wellacquainted with all ye do.
o ye who believe when ye consult the messenger in private spend something in charity before your private consultation. that will be best for you and most conducive to purity of conduct. but if ye find not the wherewithal allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
is it that ye are afraid of spending sums in charity before your private consultation with him if then ye do not so and allah forgives you then at least establish regular prayer practise regular charity and obey allah and his messenger. and allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do.
turnest thou not thy attention to those who turn in friendship to such as have the wrath of allah upon them they are neither of you nor of them and they swear to falsehood knowingly.
allah has prepared for them a severe penalty evil indeed are their deeds.
they have made their oaths a screen for their misdeeds thus they obstruct men from the path of allah therefore shall they have a humiliating penalty.
of no profit whatever to them against allah will be their riches nor their sons they will be companions of the fire to dwell therein for aye
one day will allah raise them all up for judgment then will they swear to him as they swear to you and they think that they have something to stand upon. no indeed they are but liars
the evil one has got the better of them so he has made them lose the remembrance of allah. they are the party of the evil one. truly it is the party of the evil one that will perish
those who resist allah and his messenger will be among those most humiliated.
allah has decreed it is i and my messengers who must prevail for allah is one full of strength able to enforce his will.
thou wilt not find any people who believe in allah and the last day loving those who resist allah and his messenger even though they were their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their kindred. for such he has written faith in their hearts and strengthened them with a spirit from himself. and he will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow to dwell therein for ever. allah will be well pleased with them and they with him. they are the party of allah. truly it is the party of allah that will achieve felicity.
whatever is in the heavens and on earth let it declare the praises and glory of allah for he is the exalted in might the wise.
it is he who got out the unbelievers among the people of the book from their homes at the first gathering of the forces. little did ye think that they would get out and they thought that their fortresses would defend them from allah but the wrath of allah came to them from quarters from which they little expected it and cast terror into their hearts so that they destroyed their dwellings by their own hands and the hands of the believers take warning then o ye with eyes to see
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them he would certainly have punished them in this world and in the hereafter they shall certainly have the punishment of the fire.
that is because they resisted allah and his messenger and if any one resists allah verily allah is severe in punishment.
whether ye cut down o ye muslim the tender palmtrees or ye left them standing on their roots it was by leave of allah and in order that he might cover with shame the rebellious transgresses.
what allah has bestowed on his messenger and taken away from them  for this ye made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry but allah gives power to his messengers over any he pleases and allah has power over all things.
what allah has bestowed on his messenger and taken away from the people of the townshipsnamename the needy and the wayfarer in order that it may not merely make a circuit between the wealthy among you. so take what the messenger assigns to you and deny yourselves that which he withholds from you. and fear allah for allah is strict in punishment.
some part is due to the indigent muhajirs those who were expelled from their homes and their property while seeking grace from allah and his good pleasure and aiding allah and his messenger such are indeed the sincere ones
but those who before them had homes in medina and had adopted the faithname and entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to the latter but give them preference over themselves even though poverty was their own lot. and those saved from the covetousness of their own soulsname
and those who came after them say our lord forgive us and our brethren who came before us into the faith and leave not in our hearts rancour or sense of injury against those who have believed. our lord thou art indeed full of kindness most merciful.
hast thou not observed the hypocrites say to their misbelieving brethren among the people of the book  if ye are expelled we too will go out with you and we will never hearken to any one in your affair and if ye are attacked in fight we will help you. but allah is witness that they are indeed liars.
if they are expelled never will they go out with them and if they are attacked in fight they will never help them and if they do help them they will turn their backs so they will receive no help.
of a truth ye are stronger than they because of the terror in their hearts sent by allah. this is because they are men devoid of understanding.
they will not fight you even together except in fortified townships or from behind walls. strong is their fighting spirit amongst themselves thou wouldst think they were united but their hearts are divided that is because they are a people devoid of wisdom.
like those who lately preceded them they have tasted the evil result of their conduct and in the hereafter there is for them a grievous penalty
their allies deceived them like the evil one when he says to man deny allah but when man denies allah the evil one says i am free of thee i do fear allah the lord of the worlds
the end of both will be that they will go into the fire dwelling therein for ever. such is the reward of the wrongdoers.
o ye who believe fear allah and let every soul look to what provision he has sent forth for the morrow. yea fear allah for allah is wellacquainted with all that ye do.
and be ye not like those who forgot allah and he made them forget their own souls such are the rebellious transgressors
not equal are the companions of the fire and the companions of the garden it is the companions of the garden that will achieve felicity.
had we sent down this qurxban on a mountain verily thou wouldst have seen it humble itself and cleave asunder for fear of allah. such are the similitudes which we propound to men that they may reflect.
allah is he than whom there is no other god who knows all things both secret and open he most gracious most merciful.
allah is he than whom there is no other god the sovereign the holy one the source of peace and perfection the guardian of faith the preserver of safety the exalted in might the irresistible the supreme glory to allah high is he above the partners they attribute to him.
he is allah the creator the evolver the bestower of forms or colours. to him belong the most beautiful names whatever is in the heavens and on earth doth declare his praises and glory and he is the exalted in might the wise.
o ye who believe take not my enemies and yours as friends or protectorsname even though they have rejected the truth that has come to you and have on the contrary driven out the prophet and yourselves from your homes simply because ye believe in allah your lord if ye have come out to strive in my way and to seek my good pleasure take them not as friends holding secret converse of love and friendship with them for i know full well all that ye conceal and all that ye reveal. and any of you that does this has strayed from the straight path.
if they were to get the better of you they would behave to you as enemies and stretch forth their hands and their tongues against you for evil and they desire that ye should reject the truth.
of no profit to you will be your relatives and your children on the day of judgment he will judge between you for allah sees well all that ye do.
there is for you an excellent example to follow in abraham and those with him when they said to their people we are clear of you and of whatever ye worship besides allah we have rejected you and there has arisen between us and you enmity and hatred for ever unless ye believe in allah and him alone but not when abraham said to his father i will pray for forgiveness for thee though i have no power to get aught on thy behalf from allah. they prayed our lord in thee do we trust and to thee do we turn in repentance to thee is our final goal.
our lord make us not a test and trial for the unbelievers but forgive us our lord for thou art the exalted in might the wise.
there was indeed in them an excellent example for you to followname truly allah is free of all wants worthy of all praise.
it may be that allah will grant love and friendship between you and those whom ye now hold as enemies. for allah has power over all things and allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
allah forbids you not with regard to those who fight you not for your faith nor drive you out of your homes from dealing kindly and justly with them for allah loveth those who are just.
allah only forbids you with regard to those who fight you for your faith and drive you out of your homes and support others in driving you out from turning to them for friendship and protection. it is such as turn to them in these circumstances that do wrong.
o ye who believe when there come to you believing women refugees examine and test them allah knows best as to their faith if ye ascertain that they are believers then send them not back to the unbelievers. they are not lawful wives for the unbelievers nor are the unbelievers lawful husbands for them. but pay the unbelievers what they have spent on their dower and there will be no blame on you if ye marry them on payment of their dower to them. but hold not to the guardianship of unbelieving women ask for what ye have spent on their dowers and let the unbelievers ask for what they have spent on the dowers of women who come over to you. such is the command of allah he judges with justice between you. and allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
and if any of your wives deserts you to the unbelievers and ye have an accession by the coming over of a woman from the other side then pay to those whose wives have deserted the equivalent of what they had spent on their dower. and fear allah in whom ye believe.
o prophet when believing women come to thee to take the oath of fealty to thee that they will not associate in worship any other thing whatever with allah that they will not steal that they will not commit adultery or fornication that they will not kill their children that they will not utter slander intentionally forging falsehood and that they will not disobey thee in any just mattername and pray to allah for the forgiveness of their sins for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o ye who believe turn not for friendship to people on whom is the wrath of allah of the hereafter they are already in despair just as the unbelievers are in despair about those buried in graves.
whatever is in the heavens and on earth let it declare the praises and glory of allah for he is the exalted in might the wise.
o ye who believe why say ye that which ye do not
grievously odious is it in the sight of allah that ye say that which ye do not.
truly allah loves those who fight in his cause in battle array as if they were a solid cemented structure.
and remember moses said to his people o my people why do ye vex and insult me though ye know that i am the messenger of allah sent to you then when they went wrong allah let their hearts go wrong. for allah guides not those who are rebellious transgressors.
and remember jesus the son of mary said o children of israel i am the messenger of allah sent to you confirming the law which came before me and giving glad tidings of a messenger to come after me whose name shall be ahmad. but when he came to them with clear signs they said this is evident sorcery
who doth greater wrong than one who invents falsehood against allah even as he is being invited to islam and allah guides not those who do wrong.
their intention is to extinguish allahxbs light by blowing with their mouths but allah will complete the revelation of his light even though the unbelievers may detest it.
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth that he may proclaim it over all religion even though the pagans may detest it.
o ye who believe shall i lead you to a bargain that will save you from a grievous penalty
that ye believe in allah and his messenger and that ye strive your utmost in the cause of allah with your property and your persons that will be best for you if ye but knew
he will forgive you your sins and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow and to beautiful mansions in gardens of eternity that is indeed the supreme achievement.
and another favour will he bestow which ye do lovename
o ye who believe be ye helpers of allah as said jesus the son of mary to the disciples who will be my helpers to the work of allah said the disciples we are allahxbs helpers then a portion of the children of israel believed and a portion disbelieved but we gave power to those who believed against their enemies and they became the ones that prevailed.
whatever is in the heavens and on earth doth declare the praises and glory of allahname the holy one the exalted in might the wise.
it is he who has sent amongst the unlettered a messenger from among themselves to rehearse to them his signs to sanctify them and to instruct them in scripture and wisdomname before in manifest error
as well as to confer all these benefits upon others of them who have not already joined them and he is exalted in might wise.
such is the bounty of allah which he bestows on whom he will and allah is the lord of the highest bounty.
the similitude of those who were charged with the obligations of the mosaic law but who subsequently failed in those obligations is that of a donkey which carries huge tomes but understands them not. evil is the similitude of people who falsify the signs of allah and allah guides not people who do wrong.
say o ye that stand on judaism if ye think that ye are friends to allah to the exclusion of other men then express your desire for death if ye are truthful
but never will they express their desire for death because of the deeds their hands have sent on before them and allah knows well those that do wrong
say the death from which ye flee will truly overtake you then will ye be sent back to the knower of things secret and open and he will tell you the truth of the things that ye did
o ye who believe when the call is proclaimed to prayer on friday the day of assembly hasten earnestly to the remembrance of allah and leave off business and traffic that is best for you if ye but knew
and when the prayer is finished then may ye disperse through the land and seek of the bounty of allah and celebrate the praises of allah often and without stint that ye may prosper.
but when they see some bargain or some amusement they disperse headlong to it and leave thee standing. say the blessing from the presence of allah is better than any amusement or bargain and allah is the best to provide for all needs.
when the hypocrites come to thee they say we bear witness that thou art indeed the messenger of allah. yea allah knoweth that thou art indeed his messenger and allah beareth witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars.
they have made their oaths a screen for their misdeeds thus they obstruct men from the path of allah truly evil are their deeds.
that is because they believed then they rejected faith so a seal was set on their hearts therefore they understand not.
when thou lookest at them their exteriors please thee and when they speak thou listenest to their words. they are as worthless as hollow pieces of timber propped up unable to stand on their own. they think that every cry is against them. they are the enemies so beware of them. the curse of allah be on them how are they deluded away from the truth
and when it is said to them come the messenger of allah will pray for your forgiveness they turn aside their heads and thou wouldst see them turning away their faces in arrogance.
it is equal to them whether thou pray for their forgiveness or not. allah will not forgive them. truly allah guides not rebellious transgressors.
they are the ones who say spend nothing on those who are with allahxbs messenger to the end that they may disperse and quit medina. but to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth but the hypocrites understand not.
they say if we return to medina surely the more honourable element will expel therefrom the meaner. but honour belongs to allah and his messenger and to the believers but the hypocrites know not.
o ye who believe let not your riches or your children divert you from the remembrance of allah. if any act thus the loss is their own.
and spend something in charity out of the substance which we have bestowed on you before death should come to any of you and he should say o my lord why didst thou not give me respite for a little while i should then have given largely in charity and i should have been one of the doers of good.
but to no soul will allah grant respite when the time appointed for it has come and allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.
whatever is in the heavens and on earth doth declare the praises and glory of allah to him belongs dominion and to him belongs praise and he has power over all things.
it is he who has created you and of you are some that are unbelievers and some that are believers and allah sees well all that ye do.
he has created the heavens and the earth in just proportions and has given you shape and made your shapes beautiful and to him is the final goal.
he knows what is in the heavens and on earth and he knows what ye conceal and what ye reveal yea allah knows well the secrets of all hearts.
has not the story reached you of those who rejected faith aforetime so they tasted the evil result of their conduct and they had a grievous penalty.
that was because there came to them messengers with clear signs but they said shall mere human beings direct us so they rejected the message and turned away. but allah can do without them and allah is free of all needs worthy of all praise.
the unbelievers think that they will not be raised up for judgment. say yea by my lord ye shall surely be raised up then shall ye be told the truth of all that ye did. and that is easy for allah.
believe therefore in allah and his messenger and in the light which we have sent down. and allah is well acquainted with all that ye do.
the day that he assembles you all for a day of assemblyname and those who believe in allah and work righteousnessname and he will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow to dwell therein for ever that will be the supreme achievement.
but those who reject faith and treat our signs as falsehoods they will be companions of the fire to dwell therein for aye and evil is that goal.
no kind of calamity can occur except by the leave of allah and if any one believes in allah allah guides his heart aright for allah knows all things.
so obey allah and obey his messenger but if ye turn back the duty of our messenger is but to proclaim the message clearly and openly.
allah there is no god but he and on allah therefore let the believers put their trust.
o ye who believe truly among your wives and your children are some that are enemies to yourselves so beware of them but if ye forgive and overlook and cover up their faults verily allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
your riches and your children may be but a trial but in the presence of allah is the highest reward.
so fear allah as much as ye can listen and obey and spend in charity for the benefit of your own soul and those saved from the covetousness of their own soulsname
if ye loan to allah a beautiful loan he will double it to your credit and he will grant you forgiveness for allah is most ready to appreciate service most forbearing
knower of what is open exalted in might full of wisdom.
o prophet when ye do divorce women divorce them at their prescribed periods and count accurately their prescribed periods and fear allah your lord and turn them not out of their houses nor shall they themselves leave except in case they are guilty of some open lewdness those are limits set by allah and any who transgresses the limits of allah does verily wrong his own soul thou knowest not if perchance allah will bring about thereafter some new situation.
thus when they fulfil their term appointed either take them back on equitable terms or part with them on equitable terms and take for witness two persons from among you endued with justice and establish the evidence as before allah. such is the admonition given to him who believes in allah and the last day. and for those who fear allah he ever prepares a way out
and he provides for him from sources he never could imagine. and if any one puts his trust in allah sufficient is allah for him. for allah will surely accomplish his purpose verily for all things has allah appointed a due proportion.
such of your women as have passed the age of monthly courses for them the prescribed period if ye have any doubts is three months and for those who have no courses it is the same for those who carry life within their wombs their period is until they deliver their burdens and for those who fear allah he will make their path easy.
that is the command of allah which he has sent down to you and if any one fears allah he will remove his ills from him and will enlarge his reward.
let the women live in xbiddat in the same style as ye live according to your means annoy them not so as to restrict them. and if they carry life in their wombs then spend your substance on them until they deliver their burden and if they suckle your offspring give them their recompense and take mutual counsel together according to what is just and reasonable. and if ye find yourselves in difficulties let another woman suckle the child on the fatherxbs behalf.
let the man of means spend according to his means and the man whose resources are restricted let him spend according to what allah has given him. allah puts no burden on any person beyond what he has given him. after a difficulty allah will soon grant relief.
how many populations that insolently opposed the command of their lord and of his messengers did we not then call to accountname
then did they taste the evil result of their conduct and the end of their conduct was perdition.
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment in the hereafter. therefore fear allah o ye men of understanding  who have believed for allah hath indeed sent down to you a message
an messenger who rehearses to you the signs of allah containing clear explanations that he may lead forth those who believe and do righteous deeds from the depths of darkness into light. and those who believe in allah and work righteousness he will admit to gardens beneath which rivers flow to dwell therein for ever allah has indeed granted for them a most excellent provision.
allah is he who created seven firmaments and of the earth a similar number. through the midst of them all descends his command that ye may know that allah has power over all things and that allah comprehends all things in his knowledge.
o prophet why holdest thou to be forbidden that which allah has made lawful to thee thou seekest to please thy consorts. but allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
allah has already ordained for you o men the dissolution of your oaths in some cases and allah is your protector and he is full of knowledge and wisdom.
when the prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his consorts and she then divulged it to another and allah made it known to him he confirmed part thereof and repudiated a part. then when he told her thereof she said who told thee this he said he told me who knows and is wellacquainted with all things.
if ye two turn in repentance to him your hearts are indeed so inclined but if ye back up each other against him truly allah is his protector and gabriel and every righteous one among those who believename the angels  will back him up.
it may be if he divorced you all that allah will give him in exchange consorts better than youname who believe who are devout who turn to allah in repentance who worship in humility who travel for faith and fastname
o ye who believe save yourselves and your families from a fire whose fuel is men and stones over which are appointed angels stern and severe who flinch not from executing the commands they receive from allah but do precisely what they are commanded.
they will say o ye unbelievers make no excuses this day ye are being but requited for all that ye did
o ye who believe turn to allah with sincere repentance in the hope that your lord will remove from you your ills and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flowname while they say our lord perfect our light for us and grant us forgiveness for thou hast power over all things.
o prophet strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and be firm against them. their abode is hell an evil refuge indeed.
allah sets forth for an example to the unbelievers the wife of noah and the wife of lut they were respectively under two of our righteous servants but they were false to their husbands and they profited nothing before allah on their account but were told enter ye the fire along with others that enter
and allah sets forth as an example to those who believe the wife of pharaoh behold she said o my lord build for me in nearness to thee a mansion in the garden and save me from pharaoh and his doings and save me from those that do wrong
and mary the daughter of xbimran who guarded her chastity and we breathed into her body of our spirit and she testified to the truth of the words of her lord and of his revelations and was one of the devout servants.
blessed be he in whose hands is dominion and he over all things hath power
he who created death and life that he may try which of you is best in deed and he is the exalted in might oftforgiving
he who created the seven heavens one above another no want of proportion wilt thou see in the creation of allah most gracious. so turn thy vision again seest thou any flaw
again turn thy vision a second time thy vision will come back to thee dull and discomfited in a state worn out.
and we have from of old adorned the lowest heaven with lamps and we have made such lamps as missiles to drive away the evil ones and have prepared for them the penalty of the blazing fire.
for those who reject their lord and cherisher is the penalty of hell and evil is such destination.
when they are cast therein they will hear the terrible drawing in of its breath even as it blazes forth
almost bursting with fury every time a group is cast therein its keepers will ask did no warner come to you
they will say yes indeed a warner did come to us but we rejected him and said xballah never sent down any message ye are nothing but an egregious delusionxb
they will further say had we but listened or used our intelligence we should not now be among the companions of the blazing fire
they will then confess their sins but far will be forgiveness from the companions of the blazing fire
as for those who fear their lord unseen for them is forgiveness and a great reward.
and whether ye hide your word or publish it he certainly has full knowledge of the secrets of all hearts.
should he not know he that created and he is the one that understands the finest mysteries and is wellacquainted with them.
it is he who has made the earth manageable for you so traverse ye through its tracts and enjoy of the sustenance which he furnishes but unto him is the resurrection.
do ye feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause you to be swallowed up by the earth when it shakes as in an earthquake
or do ye feel secure that he who is in heaven will not send against you a violent tornado with showers of stones so that ye shall know how terrible was my warning
but indeed men before them rejected my warning then how terrible was my rejection of them
do they not observe the birds above them spreading their wings and folding them in none can uphold them except allah most gracious truly allah most gracious truly it is he that watches over all things.
nay who is there that can help you even as an army besides allah most merciful in nothing but delusion are the unbelievers.
or who is there that can provide you with sustenance if he were to withhold his provision nay they obstinately persist in insolent impiety and flight from the truth.
is then one who walks headlong with his face grovelling better guidedname
say it is he who has created you and made you grow and made for you the faculties of hearing seeing feeling and understanding little thanks it is ye give.
say it is he who has multiplied you through the earth and to him shall ye be gathered together.
they ask when will this promise be fulfilled  if ye are telling the truth.
say as to the knowledge of the time it is with allah alone i am sent only to warn plainly in public.
at length when they see it close at hand grieved will be the faces of the unbelievers and it will be said to them this is the promise fulfilled which ye were calling for
say see ye if allah were to destroy me and those with me or if he bestows his mercy on us yet who can deliver the unbelievers from a grievous penalty
say he is allah most gracious we have believed in him and on him have we put our trust so soon will ye know which of us it is that is in manifest error.
say see ye if your stream be some morning lost in the underground earth who then can supply you with clearflowing water
nun. by the pen and the record which men write
thou art not by the grace of thy lord mad or possessed.
nay verily for thee is a reward unfailing
and thou standest on an exalted standard of character.
soon wilt thou see and they will see
which of you is afflicted with madness.
verily it is thy lord that knoweth best which among men hath strayed from his path and he knoweth best those who receive true guidance.
so hearken not to those who deny the truth.
their desire is that thou shouldst be pliant so would they be pliant.
heed not the type of despicable menname
a slanderer going about with calumnies
habitually hindering all good transgressing beyond bounds deep in sin
violent and cruelname baseborn
because he possesses wealth and numerous sons.
when to him are rehearsed our signs tales of the ancients he cries
soon shall we brand the beast on the snout
verily we have tried them as we tried the people of the garden when they resolved to gather the fruits of the garden in the morning.
but made no reservation if it be allahxbs will.
then there came on the garden a visitation from thy lord which swept away all around while they were asleep.
so the garden became by the morning like a dark and desolate spot whose fruit had been gathered.
as the morning broke they called out one to another
go ye to your tilth betimes in the morning if ye would gather the fruits.
so they departed conversing in secret low tones saying
let not a single indigent person break in upon you into the garden this day.
and they opened the morning strong in an unjust resolve.
but when they saw the garden they said we have surely lost our way
indeed we are shut out of the fruits of our labour
said one of them more just than the rest did i not say to you xbwhy not glorify allahxb
they said glory to our lord verily we have been doing wrong
then they turned one against another in reproach.
they said alas for us we have indeed transgressed
it may be that our lord will give us in exchange a better garden than this for we do turn to him in repentance
such is the punishment in this life but greater is the punishment in the hereafter if only they knew
verily for the righteous are gardens of delight in the presence of their lord.
shall we then treat the people of faith like the people of sin
what is the matter with you how judge ye
or have ye a book through which ye learn
that ye shall have through it whatever ye choose
or have ye covenants with us to oath reaching to the day of judgment providing that ye shall have whatever ye shall demand
ask thou of them which of them will stand surety for that
or have they some partners in allahhead then let them produce their partners if they are truthful
the day that the shin shall be laid bare and they shall be summoned to bow in adoration but they shall not be able
their eyes will be cast down ignominy will cover them seeing that they had been summoned aforetime to bow in adoration while they were whole and had refused.
then leave me alone with such as reject this message by degrees shall we punish them from directions they perceive not.
a long respite will i grant them truly powerful is my plan.
or is it that thou dost ask them for a reward so that they are burdened with a load of debt
or that the unseen is in their hands so that they can write it down
so wait with patience for the command of thy lord and be not like the companion of the fishname
had not grace from his lord reached him he would indeed have been cast off on the naked shore in disgrace.
thus did his lord choose him and make him of the company of the righteous.
and the unbelievers would almost trip thee up with their eyes when they hear the message and they say surely he is possessed
but it is nothing less than a message to all the worlds.
the sure reality
what is the sure reality
and what will make thee realise what the sure reality is
the thamud and the xbad people branded as false the stunning calamity
but the thamud they were destroyed by a terrible storm of thunder and lightning
and the xbad they were destroyed by a furious wind exceedingly violent
he made it rage against them seven nights and eight days in succession so that thou couldst see the whole people lying prostrate in its path as they had been roots of hollow palmtrees tumbled down
then seest thou any of them left surviving
and pharaoh and those before him and the cities overthrown committed habitual sin.
and disobeyed each the messenger of their lord so he punished them with an abundant penalty.
we when the water of noahxbs flood overflowed beyond its limits carried you mankind in the floating ark
that we might make it a message unto you and that ears that should hear the tale and retain its memory should bear its lessons in remembrance.
then when one blast is sounded on the trumpet
and the earth is moved and its mountains and they are crushed to powder at one stroke
on that day shall the great event come to pass.
and the sky will be rent asunder for it will that day be flimsy
and the angels will be on its sides and eight will that day bear the throne of thy lord above them.
that day shall ye be brought to judgment not an act of yours that ye hide will be hidden.
then he that will be given his record in his right hand will say ah here read ye my record
i did really understand that my account would one day reach me
and he will be in a life of bliss
in a garden on high
the fruits whereof will hang in bunches low and near.
eat ye and drink ye with full satisfaction because of the good that ye sent before you in the days that are gone
and he that will be given his record in his left hand will say ah would that my record had not been given to me
and that i had never realised how my account stood
ah would that death had made an end of me
of no profit to me has been my wealth
my power has perished from me...
the stern command will say seize ye him and bind ye him
and burn ye him in the blazing fire.
further make him march in a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits
this was he that would not believe in allah most high.
and would not encourage the feeding of the indigent
so no friend hath he here this day.
nor hath he any food except the corruption from the washing of wounds
which none do eat but those in sin.
so i do call to witness what ye see
and what ye see not
that this is verily the word of an honoured messenger
it is not the word of a poet little it is ye believe
nor is it the word of a soothsayer little admonition it is ye receive.
this is a message sent down from the lord of the worlds.
and if the messenger were to invent any sayings in our name
we should certainly seize him by his right hand
and we should certainly then cut off the artery of his heart
nor could any of you withhold him from our wrath.
but verily this is a message for the allahfearing.
and we certainly know that there are amongst you those that reject it.
but truly revelation is a cause of sorrow for the unbelievers.
but verily it is truth of assured certainty.
so glorify the name of thy lord most high.
a questioner asked about a penalty to befall
the unbelievers the which there is none to ward off
a penalty from allah lord of the ways of ascent.
the angels and the spirit ascend unto him in a day the measure whereof is as fifty thousand years
therefore do thou hold patience a patience of beautiful contentment.
they see the day indeed as a faroff event
but we see it quite near.
the day that the sky will be like molten brass
and the mountains will be like wool
and no friend will ask after a friend
though they will be put in sight of each othername
his wife and his brother
his kindred who sheltered him
and all all that is on earth so it could deliver him
by no means for it would be the fire of hell
plucking out his being right to the skull
inviting all such as turn their backs and turn away their faces from the right.
and collect wealth and hide it from use
truly man was created very impatient
fretful when evil touches him
and niggardly when good reaches him
not so those devoted to prayer
those who remain steadfast to their prayer
and those in whose wealth is a recognised right.
for the needy who asks and him who is prevented for some reason from asking
and those who hold to the truth of the day of judgment
and those who fear the displeasure of their lord
for their lordxbs displeasure is the opposite of peace and tranquillity
and those who guard their chastity
except with their wives and the captives whom their right hands possessname
but those who trespass beyond this are transgressors
and those who respect their trusts and covenants
and those who stand firm in their testimonies
and those who guard the sacredness of their worship
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens of bliss.
now what is the matter with the unbelievers that they rush madly before thee
from the right and from the left in crowds
does every man of them long to enter the garden of bliss
by no means for we have created them out of the base matter they know
now i do call to witness the lord of all points in the east and the west that we can certainly
substitute for them better men than they and we are not to be defeated in our plan.
so leave them to plunge in vain talk and play about until they encounter that day of theirs which they have been promised
the day whereon they will issue from their sepulchres in sudden haste as if they were rushing to a goalpost fixed for them
their eyes lowered in dejection ignominy covering them all over such is the day the which they are promised
we sent noah to his people with the command do thou warn thy people before there comes to them a grievous penalty.
he said o my people i am to you a warner clear and open
that ye should worship allah fear him and obey me
so he may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a stated term for when the term given by allah is accomplished it cannot be put forward if ye only knew.
he said o my lord i have called to my people night and day
but my call only increases their flight from the right.
and every time i have called to them that thou mightest forgive them they have only thrust their fingers into their ears covered themselves up with their garments grown obstinate and given themselves up to arrogance.
so i have called to them aloud
further i have spoken to them in public and secretly in private
saying xbask forgiveness from your lord for he is oftforgiving
xbhe will send rain to you in abundance
xbgive you increase in wealth and sons and bestow on you gardens and bestow on you rivers of flowing water.
xbwhat is the matter with you that ye place not your hope for kindness and longsuffering in allah
xbseeing that it is he that has created you in diverse stages
xbsee ye not how allah has created the seven heavens one above another
xband made the moon a light in their midst and made the sun as a glorious lamp
xband allah has produced you from the earth growing gradually
xband in the end he will return you into the earth and raise you forth again at the resurrection
xband allah has made the earth for you as a carpet spread out
xbthat ye may go about therein in spacious roads.xb
noah said o my lord they have disobeyed me but they follow men whose wealth and children give them no increase but only loss.
and they have devised a tremendous plot.
and they have said to each other xbabandon not your gods abandon neither wadd nor suwaxb neither yaguth nor yaxbuq nor nasrxb
they have already misled many and grant thou no increase to the wrongdoers but in straying from their mark.
because of their sins they were drowned in the flood and were made to enter the fire of punishment and they found in lieu of allah none to help them.
and noah said o my lord leave not of the unbelievers a single one on earth
for if thou dost leave any of them they will but mislead thy devotees and they will breed none but wicked ungrateful ones.
o my lord forgive me my parents all who enter my house in faith and all believing men and believing women and to the wrongdoers grant thou no increase but in perdition
say it has been revealed to me that a company of jinns listened to the qurxban. they said xbwe have really heard a wonderful recital
xbit gives guidance to the right and we have believed therein we shall not join in worship any gods with our lord.
xband exalted is the majesty of our lord he has taken neither a wife nor a son.
xbthere were some foolish ones among us who used to utter extravagant lies against allah
xbbut we do think that no man or spirit should say aught that untrue against allah.
xbtrue there were persons among mankind who took shelter with persons among the jinns but they increased them in folly.
xband they came to think as ye thought that allah would not raise up any one to judgment.
xband we pried into the secrets of heaven but we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires.
xbwe used indeed to sit there in hidden stations to steal a hearing but any who listen now will find a flaming fire watching him in ambush.
xband we understand not whether ill is intended to those on earth or whether their lord really intends to guide them to right conduct.
xbthere are among us some that are righteous and some the contrary we follow divergent paths.
xbbut we think that we can by no means frustrate allah throughout the earth nor can we frustrate him by flight.
xband as for us since we have listened to the guidance we have accepted it and any who believes in his lord has no fear either of a short account or of any injustice.
xbamongst us are some that submit their wills to allah and some that swerve from justice. now those who submit their wills  they have sought out the path of right conduct
xbbut those who swerve they are but fuel for hellfirexb
and allahxbs message is if they the pagans had only remained on the right way we should certainly have bestowed on them rain in abundance.
that we might try them by that means. but if any turns away from the remembrance of his lord he will cause him to undergo a severe penalty.
and the places of worship are for allah alone so invoke not any one along with allah
yet when the devotee of allah stands forth to invoke him they just make round him a dense crowd.
say i do no more than invoke my lord and i join not with him any false god.
say it is not in my power to cause you harm or to bring you to right conduct.
say no one can deliver me from allah if i were to disobey him nor should i find refuge except in him
unless i proclaim what i receive from allah and his messages for any that disobey allah and his messenger for them is hell they shall dwell therein for ever.
at length when they see with their own eyes that which they are promisedname
say i know not whether the punishment which ye are promised is near or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term.
he alone knows the unseen nor does he make any one acquainted with his mysteries
except a messenger whom he has chosen and then he makes a band of watchers march before him and behind him
that he may know that they have truly brought and delivered the messages of their lord and he surrounds all the mysteries that are with them and takes account of every single thing.
o thou folded in garments
stand to prayer by night but not all night
half of itname
or a little more and recite the qurxban in slow measured rhythmic tones.
soon shall we send down to thee a weighty message.
truly the rising by night is most potent for governing the soul and most suitable for framing the word of prayer and praise.
true there is for thee by day prolonged occupation with ordinary duties
but keep in remembrance the name of thy lord and devote thyself to him wholeheartedly.
he is lord of the east and the west there is no god but he take him therefore for thy disposer of affairs.
and have patience with what they say and leave them with noble dignity.
and leave me alone to deal with those in possession of the good things of life who yet deny the truth and bear with them for a little while.
with us are fetters to bind them and a fire to burn them
and a food that chokes and a penalty grievous.
one day the earth and the mountains will be in violent commotion. and the mountains will be as a heap of sand poured out and flowing down.
we have sent to you o men a messenger to be a witness concerning you even as we sent a messenger to pharaoh.
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger so we seized him with a heavy punishment.
then how shall ye if ye deny allah guard yourselves against a day that will make children hoaryheaded
whereon the sky will be cleft asunder his promise needs must be accomplished.
verily this is an admonition therefore whoso will let him take a straight path to his lord
thy lord doth know that thou standest forth to prayer nigh twothirds of the night or half the night or a third of the night and so doth a party of those with thee. but allah doth appoint night and day in due measure he knoweth that ye are unable to keep count thereof. so he hath turned to you in mercy read ye therefore of the qurxban as much as may be easy for you. he knoweth that there may be some among you in illhealth others travelling through the land seeking of allahxbs bounty yet others fighting in allahxbs cause read ye therefore as much of the qurxban as may be easy for you and establish regular prayer and give regular charity and loan to allah a beautiful loan. and whatever good ye send forth for your souls ye shall find it in allahxbs presencename better and greater in reward and seek ye the grace of allah for allah is oftforgiving most merciful.
o thou wrapped up in the mantle
arise and deliver thy warning
and thy lord do thou magnify
and thy garments keep free from stain
and all abomination shun
nor expect in giving any increase for thyself
but for thy lordxbs cause be patient and constant
finally when the trumpet is sounded
that will be that day  a day of distress
far from easy for those without faith.
leave me alone to deal with the creature whom i created bare and alone
to whom i granted resources in abundance
and sons to be by his side
to whom i made life smooth and comfortable
yet is he greedythat i should add yet more
by no means for to our signs he has been refractory
soon will i visit him with a mount of calamities
for he thought and he plotted
and woe to him how he plotted
yea woe to him how he plotted
then he looked round
then he frowned and he scowled
then he turned back and was haughty
then said he this is nothing but magic derived from of old
this is nothing but the word of a mortal
soon will i cast him into hellfire
and what will explain to thee what hellfire is
naught doth it permit to endure and naught doth it leave alone
darkening and changing the colour of man
over it are nineteen.
and we have set none but angels as guardians of the fire and we have fixed their number only as a trial for unbelieversname and the believers may increase in faithname and that those in whose hearts is a disease and the unbelievers may say what symbol doth allah intend by this thus doth allah leave to stray whom he pleaseth and guide whom he pleaseth and none can know the forces of thy lord except he and this is no other than a warning to mankind.
nay verily by the moon
and by the night as it retreateth
and by the dawn as it shineth forth
this is but one of the mighty portents
a warning to mankind
to any of you that chooses to press forward or to follow behind
every soul will be held in pledge for its deeds.
except the companions of the right hand.
they will be in gardens of delight they will question each other
and ask of the sinners
what led you into hell fire
they will say we were not of those who prayed
nor were we of those who fed the indigent
but we used to talk vanities with vain talkers
and we used to deny the day of judgment
until there came to us the hour that is certain.
then will no intercession of any intercessors profit them.
then what is the matter with them that they turn away from admonition
as if they were affrighted asses
fleeing from a lion
forsooth each one of them wants to be given scrolls of revelation spread out
by no means but they fear not the hereafter
nay this surely is an admonition
let any who will keep it in remembrance
but none will keep it in remembrance except as allah wills he is the lord of righteousness and the lord of forgiveness.
i do call to witness the resurrection day
and i do call to witness the selfreproaching spirit eschew evil.
does man think that we cannot assemble his bones
nay we are able to put together in perfect order the very tips of his fingers.
but man wishes to do wrong even in the time in front of him.
he questions when is the day of resurrection
at length when the sight is dazed
and the moon is buried in darkness.
and the sun and moon are joined together
that day will man say where is the refuge
by no means no place of safety
before thy lord alone that day will be the place of rest.
that day will man be told all that he put forward and all that he put back.
nay man will be evidence against himself
even though he were to put up his excuses.
move not thy tongue concerning the qurxban to make haste therewith.
it is for us to collect it and to promulgate it
but when we have promulgated it follow thou its recital as promulgated
nay more it is for us to explain it and make it clear
nay ye men but ye love the fleeting life
and leave alone the hereafter.
some faces that day will beam in brightness and beauty
looking towards their lord
and some faces that day will be sad and dismal
in the thought that some backbreaking calamity was about to be inflicted on them
yea when the soul reaches to the collarbone in its exit
and there will be a cry who is a magician to restore him
and he will conclude that it was the time of parting
and one leg will be joined with another
that day the drive will be all to thy lord
so he gave nothing in charity nor did he pray
but on the contrary he rejected truth and turned away
then did he stalk to his family in full conceit
woe to thee o men yea woe
again woe to thee o men yea woe
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled without purpose
was he not a drop of sperm emitted in lowly form
then did he become a leechlike clot then did allah make and fashion him in due proportion.
and of him he made two sexes male and female.
has not he the same the power to give life to the dead
has there not been over man a long period of time when he was nothing  not even mentioned
verily we created man from a drop of mingled sperm in order to try him so we gave him the gifts of hearing and sight.
we showed him the way whether he be grateful or ungrateful rests on his will.
for the rejecters we have prepared chains yokes and a blazing fire.
as to the righteous they shall drink of a cup of wine mixed with kafur
a fountain where the devotees of allah do drink making it flow in unstinted abundance.
they perform their vows and they fear a day whose evil flies far and wide.
and they feed for the love of allah the indigent the orphan and the captive
sayingwe feed you for the sake of allah alone no reward do we desire from you nor thanks.
we only fear a day of distressful wrath from the side of our lord.
but allah will deliver them from the evil of that day and will shed over them a light of beauty and blissful joy.
and because they were patient and constant he will reward them with a garden and garments of silk.
reclining in the garden on raised thrones they will see there neither the sunxbs excessive heat nor the moonxbs excessive cold.
and the shades of the garden will come low over them and the bunches of fruit there will hang low in humility.
and amongst them will be passed round vessels of silver and goblets of crystal
crystalclear made of silver they will determine the measure thereof according to their wishes.
and they will be given to drink there of a cup of wine mixed with zanjabil
a fountain there called salsabil.
and round about them will serve youths of perpetual freshness if thou seest them thou wouldst think them scattered pearls.
and when thou lookest it is there thou wilt see a bliss and a realm magnificent.
upon them will be green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver and their lord will give to them to drink of a wine pure and holy.
verily this is a reward for you and your endeavour is accepted and recognised.
it is we who have sent down the qurxban to thee by stages.
therefore be patient with constancy to the command of thy lord and hearken not to the sinner or the ingrate among them.
and celebrate the name of thy lord morning and evening
and part of the night prostrate thyself to him and glorify him a long night through.
as to these they love the fleeting life and put away behind them a day that will be hard.
it is we who created them and we have made their joints strong but when we will we can substitute the like of them by a complete change.
this is an admonition whosoever will let him take a straight path to his lord.
but ye will not except as allah wills for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.
he will admit to his mercy whom he will but the wrongdoersname
by the winds sent forth one after another to manxbs profit
which then blow violently in tempestuous gusts
and scatter things far and wide
then separate them one from another
then spread abroad a message
whether of justification or of warning
assuredly what ye are promised must come to pass.
then when the stars become dim
when the heaven is cleft asunder
when the mountains are scattered to the winds as dust
and when the messengers are all appointed a time to collect
for what day are these portents deferred
for the day of sorting out.
and what will explain to thee what is the day of sorting out
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
did we not destroy the men of old for their evil
so shall we make later generations follow them.
thus do we deal with men of sin.
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
have we not created you from a fluid held despicable
the which we placed in a place of rest firmly fixed
for a period of gestation determined according to need
for we do determine according to need for we are the best to determine things.
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
have we not made the earth as a place to draw together.
the living and the dead
and made therein mountains standing firm lofty in stature and provided for you water sweet and wholesome
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
it will be said depart ye to that which ye used to reject as false
depart ye to a shadow of smoke ascending in three columns
which yields no shade of coolness and is of no use against the fierce blaze.
indeed it throws about sparks huge as forts
as if there were a string of yellow camels marching swiftly.
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
that will be a day when they shall not be able to speak.
nor will it be open to them to put forth pleas.
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
that will be a day of sorting out we shall gather you together and those before you
now if ye have a trick or plot use it against me
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
as to the righteous they shall be amidst cool shades and springs of water.
and they shall have fruitsname
eat ye and drink ye to your heartxbs content for that ye worked righteousness.
thus do we certainly reward the doers of good.
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
o ye unjust eat ye and enjoy yourselves but a little while for that ye are sinners.
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
and when it is said to them prostrate yourselves they do not so.
ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
then what message after that will they believe in
concerning what are they disputing
concerning the great news
about which they cannot agree.
verily they shall soon come to know
verily verily they shall soon come to know
have we not made the earth as a wide expanse
and the mountains as pegs
and have we not created you in pairs
and made your sleep for rest
and made the night as a covering
and made the day as a means of subsistence
and have we not built over you the seven firmaments
and placed therein a light of splendour
and do we not send down from the clouds water in abundance
that we may produce therewith corn and vegetables
and gardens of luxurious growth
verily the day of sorting out is a thing appointed
the day that the trumpet shall be sounded and ye shall come forth in crowds
and the heavens shall be opened as if there were doors
and the mountains shall vanish as if they were a mirage.
truly hell is as a place of ambush
for the transgressors a place of destination
they will dwell therein for ages.
nothing cool shall they taste therein nor any drink
save a boiling fluid and a fluid dark murky intensely cold
a fitting recompense for them.
for that they used not to fear any account for their deeds
but they impudently treated our signs as false.
and all things have we preserved on record.
so taste ye the fruits of your deeds for no increase shall we grant you except in punishment.
verily for the righteous there will be a fulfilment of the heartxbs desires
gardens enclosed and grapevines
and voluptuous women of equal age
and a cup full to the brim.
no vanity shall they hear therein nor untruth
recompense from thy lord a gift amply sufficient
from the lord of the heavens and the earth and all between allah most gracious none shall have power to argue with him.
the day that the spirit and the angels will stand forth in ranks none shall speak except any who is permitted by allah most gracious and he will say what is right.
that day will be the sure reality therefore whoso will let him take a straight return to his lord
verily we have warned you of a penalty near the day when man will see the deeds which his hands have sent forth and the unbeliever will say woe unto me would that i were metre dust
by the angels who tear out the souls of the wicked with violence
by those who gently draw out the souls of the blessed
and by those who glide along on errands of mercy
then press forward as in a race
then arrange to do the commands of their lord
one day everything that can be in commotion will be in violent commotion
followed by oftrepeated commotions
hearts that day will be in agitation
cast down will be their ownersxb eyes.
they say now what shall we indeed be returned to our former state
what  when we shall have become rotten bones
they say it would in that case be a return with loss
but verily it will be but a single compelling cry
when behold they will be in the full awakening to judgment.
has the story of moses reached thee
behold thy lord did call to him in the sacred valley of tuwa
go thou to pharaoh for he has indeed transgressed all bounds
and say to him xbwouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified from sin
xband that i guide thee to thy lord so thou shouldst fear himxb
then did moses show him the great sign.
but pharaoh rejected it and disobeyed guidance
further he turned his back striving hard against allah.
then he collected his men and made a proclamation
saying i am your lord most high.
but allah did punish him and made an example of him  in the hereafter as in this life.
verily in this is an instructive warning for whosoever feareth allah.
what are ye the more difficult to create or the heaven above allah hath constructed it
on high hath he raised its canopy and he hath given it order and perfection.
its night doth he endow with darkness and its splendour doth he bring out with light.
and the earth moreover hath he extended to a wide expanse
he draweth out therefrom its moisture and its pasture
and the mountains hath he firmly fixed
for use and convenience to you and your cattle.
therefore when there comes the great overwhelming event
the day when man shall remember all that he strove for
and hellfire shall be placed in full view for all to see
then for such as had transgressed all bounds
and had preferred the life of this world
the abode will be hellfire
and for such as had entertained the fear of standing before their lordxbs tribunal and had restrained their soul from lower desires
their abode will be the garden.
they ask thee about the hourname
wherein art thou concerned with the declaration thereof
with thy lord in the limit fixed therefor.
thou art but a warner for such as fear it.
the day they see it it will be as if they had tarried but a single evening or at most till the following morn
the prophet frowned and turned away
because there came to him the blind man interrupting.
but what could tell thee but that perchance he might grow in spiritual understanding
or that he might receive admonition and the teaching might profit him
as to one who regards himself as selfsufficient
to him dost thou attend
though it is no blame to thee if he grow not in spiritual understanding.
but as to him who came to thee striving earnestly
and with fear in his heart
of him wast thou unmindful.
by no means should it be so for it is indeed a message of instruction
therefore let whoso will keep it in remembrance.
it is in books held greatly in honour
exalted in dignity kept pure and holy
written by the hands of scribes
honourable and pious and just.
woe to man what hath made him reject allah
from what stuff hath he created him
from a spermdrop he hath created him and then mouldeth him in due proportions
then doth he make his path smooth for him
then he causeth him to die and putteth him in his grave
then when it is his will he will raise him up again.
by no means hath he fulfilled what allah hath commanded him.
then let man look at his food and how we provide it
for that we pour forth water in abundance
and we split the earth in fragments
and produce therein corn
and grapes and nutritious plants
and olives and dates
and enclosed gardens dense with lofty trees
and fruits and fodder
for use and convenience to you and your cattle.
at length when there comes the deafening noise
that day shall a man flee from his own brother
and from his mother and his father
and from his wife and his children.
each one of them that day will have enough concern of his own to make him indifferent to the others.
some faces that day will be beaming
laughing rejoicing.
and other faces that day will be duststained
blackness will cover them
such will be the rejecters of allah the doers of iniquity.
when the sun with its spacious light is folded up
when the stars fall losing their lustre
when the mountains vanish like a mirage
when the shecamels ten months with young are left untended
when the wild beasts are herded together in the human habitations
when the oceans boil over with a swell
when the souls are sorted out being joined like with like
when the female infant buried alive is questioned 
for what crime she was killed
when the scrolls are laid open
when the world on high is unveiled
when the blazing fire is kindled to fierce heat
and when the garden is brought near
then shall each soul know what it has put forward.
so verily i call to witness the planets  that recede
go straight or hide
and the night as it dissipates
and the dawn as it breathes away the darkness
verily this is the word of a most honourable messenger
endued with power with rank before the lord of the throne
with authority there and faithful to his trust.
and o people your companion is not one possessed
and without doubt he saw him in the clear horizon.
neither doth he withhold grudgingly a knowledge of the unseen.
nor is it the word of an evil spirit accursed.
when whither go ye
verily this is no less than a message to all the worlds
with profit to whoever among you wills to go straight
but ye shall not will except as allah willsname
when the sky is cleft asunder
when the stars are scattered
when the oceans are suffered to burst forth
and when the graves are turned upside down
then shall each soul know what it hath sent forward and what it hath kept back.
o man what has seduced thee from thy lord most beneficent
him who created thee. fashioned thee in due proportion and gave thee a just bias
in whatever form he wills does he put thee together.
nay but ye do reject right and judgment
but verily over you are appointed angels to protect you
kind and honourable writing down your deeds
they know and understand all that ye do.
as for the righteous they will be in bliss
and the wicked  they will be in the fire
which they will enter on the day of judgment
and they will not be able to keep away therefrom.
and what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is
again what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is
it will be the day when no soul shall have power to do aught for another for the command that day will be wholly with allah.
woe to those that deal in fraud
those who when they have to receive by measure from men exact full measure
but when they have to give by measure or weight to men give less than due.
do they not think that they will be called to account
on a mighty day
a day when all mankind will stand before the lord of the worlds
nay surely the record of the wicked is preserved in sijjin.
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is
there is a register fully inscribed.
woe that day to those that deny
those that deny the day of judgment.
and none can deny it but the transgressor beyond bounds the sinner
when our signs are rehearsed to him he says tales of the ancients
by no means but on their hearts is the stain of the ill which they do
verily from the light of their lord that day will they be veiled.
further they will enter the fire of hell.
further it will be said to them this is the reality which ye rejected as false
day verily the record of the righteous is preserved in xbilliyin.
and what will explain to thee what xbilliyun is
there is a register fully inscribed
to which bear witness those nearest to allah.
truly the righteous will be in bliss
on thrones of dignity will they command a sight of all things
thou wilt recognise in their faces the beaming brightness of bliss.
their thirst will be slaked with pure wine sealed
the seal thereof will be musk and for this let those aspire who have aspirations
with it will be given a mixture of tasnim
a spring from the waters whereof drink those nearest to allah.
those in sin used to laugh at those who believed
and whenever they passed by them used to wink at each other in mockery
and when they returned to their own people they would return jesting
and whenever they saw them they would say behold these are the people truly astray
but they had not been sent as keepers over them
but on this day the believers will laugh at the unbelievers
on thrones of dignity they will command a sight of all things.
will not the unbelievers have been paid back for what they did
when the sky is rent asunder
and hearkens to the command of its lord and it must needs do so
and when the earth is flattened out
and casts forth what is within it and becomes clean empty
and hearkens to the command of its lord and it must needs do so then will come home the full reality.
o thou man verily thou art ever toiling on towards thy lord painfully toilingname
then he who is given his record in his right hand
soon will his account be taken by an easy reckoning
and he will turn to his people rejoicing
but he who is given his record behind his back
soon will he cry for perdition
and he will enter a blazing fire.
truly did he go about among his people rejoicing
truly did he think that he would not have to return to us
nay nay for his lord was ever watchful of him
so i do call to witness the ruddy glow of sunset
the night and its homing
and the moon in her fullness
ye shall surely travel from stage to stage.
what then is the matter with them that they believe not
and when the qurxban is read to them they fall not prostrate
but on the contrary the unbelievers reject it.
but allah has full knowledge of what they secrete in their breasts
so announce to them a penalty grievous
except to those who believe and work righteous deeds for them is a reward that will never fail.
by the sky displaying the zodiacal signs
by the promised day of judgment
by one that witnesses and the subject of the witness
woe to the makers of the pit of fire
fire supplied abundantly with fuel
behold they sat over against the fire
and they witnessed all that they were doing against the believers.
and they illtreated them for no other reason than that they believed in allah exalted in power worthy of all praise
him to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and allah is witness to all things.
those who persecute or draw into temptation the believers men and women and do not turn in repentance will have the penalty of hell they will have the penalty of the burning fire.
for those who believe and do righteous deeds will be gardens beneath which rivers flow that is the great salvation the fulfilment of all desires
truly strong is the grip and power of thy lord.
it is he who creates from the very beginning and he can restore life.
and he is the oftforgiving full of lovingkindness
lord of the throne of glory
doer without let of all that he intends.
has the story reached thee of the forces
of pharaoh and the thamud
and yet the unbelievers persist in rejecting the truth
but allah doth encompass them from behind
day this is a glorious qurxban
inscribed in a tablet preserved
by the sky and the nightvisitant therein
and what will explain to thee what the nightvisitant is
it is the star of piercing brightness
there is no soul but has a protector over it.
now let man but think from what he is created
he is created from a drop emitted
proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs
surely allah is able to bring him back to life
the day that all things secret will be tested
man will have no power and no helper.
by the firmament which returns in its round
and by the earth which opens out for the gushing of springs or the sprouting of vegetation
behold this is the word that distinguishes good from evil
it is not a thing for amusement.
as for them they are but plotting a scheme
and i am planning a scheme.
therefore grant a delay to the unbelievers give respite to them gently for awhile.
glorify the name of thy guardianlord most high
who hath created and further given order and proportion
who hath ordained laws. and granted guidance
and who bringeth out the green and luscious pasture
and then doth make it but swarthy stubble.
by degrees shall we teach thee to declare the message so thou shalt not forget
except as allah wills for he knoweth what is manifest and what is hidden.
and we will make it easy for thee to follow the simple path.
therefore give admonition in case the admonition profits the hearer.
the admonition will be received by those who fear allah
but it will be avoided by those most unfortunate ones
who will enter the great fire
in which they will then neither die nor live.
but those will prosper who purify themselves
and glorify the name of their guardianlord and lift their hearts in prayer.
day behold ye prefer the life of this world
but the hereafter is better and more enduring.
and this is in the books of the earliest revelation
the books of abraham and moses.
has the story reached thee of the overwhelming event
some faces that day will be humiliated
labouring hard weary
the while they enter the blazing fire
the while they are given to drink of a boiling hot spring
no food will there be for them but a bitter dharixb
which will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger.
other faces that day will be joyful
pleased with their striving
in a garden on high
where they shall hear no word of vanity
therein will be a bubbling spring
therein will be thrones of dignity raised on high
goblets placed ready
and cushions set in rows
and rich carpets all spread out.
do they not look at the camels how they are made
and at the sky how it is raised high
and at the mountains how they are fixed firm
and at the earth how it is spread out
therefore do thou give admonition for thou art one to admonish.
thou art not one to manage menxbs affairs.
but if any turn away and reject allah
allah will punish him with a mighty punishment
for to us will be their return
then it will be for us to call them to account.
by the break of day
by the nights twice five
by the even and odd contrasted
and by the night when it passeth away
is there not in these an adjuration or evidence for those who understand
seest thou not how thy lord dealt with the xbad people
of the city of iram with lofty pillars
the like of which were not produced in all the land
and with the thamud people who cut out huge rocks in the valley
and with pharaoh lord of stakes
all these transgressed beyond bounds in the lands
and heaped therein mischief on mischief.
therefore did thy lord pour on them a scourge of diverse chastisements
for thy lord is as a guardian on a watchtower.
now as for man when his lord trieth him giving him honour and gifts then saith he puffed up my lord hath honoured me.
but when he trieth him restricting his subsistence for him then saith he in despair my lord hath humiliated me
nay nay but ye honour not the orphans
nor do ye encourage one another to feed the poor
and ye devour inheritance  all with greed
and ye love wealth with inordinate love
nay when the earth is pounded to powder
and thy lord cometh and his angels rank upon rank
and hell that day is brought face to facename but how will that remembrance profit him
he will say ah would that i had sent forth good deeds for this my future life
for that day his chastisement will be such as none else can inflict
and his bonds will be such as none other can bind.
to the righteous soul will be said o thou soul in complete rest and satisfaction
come back thou to thy lordname and wellpleasing unto him
enter thou then among my devotees
yea enter thou my heaven
i do call to witness this city
and thou art a freeman of this city
and the mystic ties of parent and child
verily we have created man into toil and struggle.
thinketh he that none hath power over him
he may say boastfully wealth have i squandered in abundance
thinketh he that none beholdeth him
have we not made for him a pair of eyes
and a tongue and a pair of lips
and shown him the two highways
but he hath made no haste on the path that is steep.
and what will explain to thee the path that is steep
it is freeing the bondman
or the giving of food in a day of privation
to the orphan with claims of relationship
or to the indigent down in the dust.
then will he be of those who believe and enjoin patience constancy and selfrestraint and enjoin deeds of kindness and compassion.
such are the companions of the right hand.
but those who reject our signs they are the unhappy companions of the left hand.
on them will be fire vaulted over all round.
by the sun and his glorious splendour
by the moon as she follows him
by the day as it shows up the sunxbs glory
by the night as it conceals it
by the firmament and its wonderful structure
by the earth and its wide expanse
by the soul and the proportion and order given to it
and its enlightenment as to its wrong and its right
truly he succeeds that purifies it
and he fails that corrupts it
the thamud people rejected their prophet through their inordinate wrongdoing
behold the most wicked man among them was deputed for impiety.
but the messenger of allah said to them it is a shecamel of allah and bar her not from having her drink
then they rejected him as a false prophet and they hamstrung her. so their lord on account of their crime obliterated their traces and made them equal in destruction high and low
and for him is no fear of its consequences.
by the night as it conceals the light
by the day as it appears in glory
by the mystery of the creation of male and female
verily the ends ye strive for are diverse.
so he who gives in charity and fears allah
and in all sincerity testifies to the best
we will indeed make smooth for him the path to bliss.
but he who is a greedy miser and thinks himself selfsufficient
and gives the lie to the best
we will indeed make smooth for him the path to misery
nor will his wealth profit him when he falls headlong into the pit.
verily we take upon ourselves to guide
and verily unto us belong the end and the beginning.
therefore do i warn you of a fire blazing fiercely
none shall reach it but those most unfortunate ones
who give the lie to truth and turn their backs.
but those most devoted to allah shall be removed far from it
those who spend their wealth for increase in selfpurification
and have in their minds no favour from anyone for which a reward is expected in return
but only the desire to seek for the countenance of their lord most high
and soon will they attain complete satisfaction.
by the glorious morning light
and by the night when it is still
thy guardianlord hath not forsaken thee nor is he displeased.
and verily the hereafter will be better for thee than the present.
and soon will thy guardianlord give thee that wherewith thou shalt be wellpleased.
did he not find thee an orphan and give thee shelter and care
and he found thee wandering and he gave thee guidance.
and he found thee in need and made thee independent.
therefore treat not the orphan with harshness
nor repulse the petitioner unheard
but the bounty of the lord  rehearse and proclaim
have we not expanded thee thy breast
and removed from thee thy burden
the which did gall thy back
and raised high the esteem in which thou art held
so verily with every difficulty there is relief
verily with every difficulty there is relief.
therefore when thou art free from thine immediate task still labour hard
and to thy lord turn all thy attention.
by the fig and the olive
and the mount of sinai
and this city of security
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds
then do we abase him to be the lowest of the low
except such as believe and do righteous deeds for they shall have a reward unfailing.
then what can after this contradict thee as to the judgment to come
is not allah the wisest of judges
proclaim or read in the name of thy lord and cherisher who created
created man out of a mere clot of congealed blood
proclaim and thy lord is most bountiful
he who taught the use of the pen
taught man that which he knew not.
day but man doth transgress all bounds
in that he looketh upon himself as selfsufficient.
verily to thy lord is the return of all.
seest thou one who forbids
a votary when he turns to pray
seest thou if he is on the road of guidance
or enjoins righteousness
seest thou if he denies truth and turns away
knoweth he not that allah doth see
let him beware if he desist not we will drag him by the forelock
a lying sinful forelock
then let him call for help to his council of comrades
we will call on the angels of punishment to deal with him
day heed him not but bow down in adoration and bring thyself the closer to allah
we have indeed revealed this message in the night of power
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is
the night of power is better than a thousand months.
therein come down the angels and the spirit by allahxbs permission on every errand
peace...this until the rise of morn
those who reject truth among the people of the book and among the polytheists were not going to depart from their ways until there should come to them clear evidence
an messenger from allah rehearsing scriptures kept pure and holy
wherein are laws or decrees right and straight.
nor did the people of the book make schisms until after there came to them clear evidence.
and they have been commanded no more than this to worship allah offering him sincere devotion being true in faith to establish regular prayer and to practise regular charity and that is the religion right and straight.
those who reject truth among the people of the book and among the polytheists will be in hellfire to dwell therein for aye. they are the worst of creatures.
those who have faith and do righteous deedsname
their reward is with allah gardens of eternity beneath which rivers flow they will dwell therein for ever allah well pleased with them and they with him all this for such as fear their lord and cherisher.
when the earth is shaken to her utmost convulsion
and the earth throws up her burdens from within
and man cries distressed xbwhat is the matter with herxb
on that day will she declare her tidings
for that thy lord will have given her inspiration.
on that day will men proceed in companies sorted out to be shown the deeds that they had done.
then shall anyone who has done an atomxbs weight of good see it
and anyone who has done an atomxbs weight of evil shall see it.
by the steeds that run with panting breath
and strike sparks of fire
and push home the charge in the morning
and raise the dust in clouds the while
and penetrate forthwith into the midst of the foe en masse
truly man is to his lord ungrateful
and to that fact he bears witness by his deeds
and violent is he in his love of wealth.
does he not knowname
and that which is locked up in human breasts is made manifest
that their lord had been wellacquainted with them even to that day
the day of noise and clamour
what is the day of noise and clamour
and what will explain to thee what the day of noise and clamour is
it is a day whereon men will be like moths scattered about
and the mountains will be like carded wool.
then he whose balance of good deeds will be found heavy
will be in a life of good pleasure and satisfaction.
but he whose balance of good deeds will be found light
will have his home in a bottomless pit.
and what will explain to thee what this is
it is a fire blazing fiercely
the mutual rivalry for piling up the good things of this world diverts you from the more serious things
until ye visit the graves.
but nay ye soon shall know the reality.
again ye soon shall know
nay were ye to know with certainty of mind ye would beware
ye shall certainly see hellfire
again ye shall see it with certainty of sight
then shall ye be questioned that day about the joy ye indulged in.
by the token of time through the ages
verily man is in loss
except such as have faith and do righteous deeds and join together in the mutual teaching of truth and of patience and constancy.
woe to every kind of scandalmonger andbackbiter
who pileth up wealth and layeth it by
thinking that his wealth would make him last for ever
by no means he will be sure to be thrown into that which breaks to pieces
and what will explain to thee that which breaks to pieces
it is the fire of the wrath of allah kindled to a blaze
the which doth mount right to the hearts
it shall be made into a vault over them
in columns outstretched.
seest thou not how thy lord dealt with the companions of the elephant
did he not make their treacherous plan go astray
and he sent against them flights of birds
striking them with stones of baked clay.
then did he make them like an empty field of stalks and straw of which the corn has been eaten up.
for the covenants of security and safeguard enjoyed by the quraish
their covenants covering journeys by winter and summer
let them adore the lord of this house
who provides them with food against hunger and with security against fear of danger.
seest thou one who denies the judgment to come
then such is the man who repulses the orphan with harshness
and encourages not the feeding of the indigent.
so woe to the worshippers
who are neglectful of their prayers
those who want but to be seen of men
but refuse to supply even neighbourly needs.
to thee have we granted the fount of abundance.
therefore to thy lord turn in prayer and sacrifice.
for he who hateth thee he will be cut off from future hope.
say  o ye that reject faith
i worship not that which ye worship
nor will ye worship that which i worship.
and i will not worship that which ye have been wont to worship
nor will ye worship that which i worship.
to you be your way and to me mine.
when comes the help of allah and victory
and thou dost see the people enter allahxbs religion in crowds
celebrate the praises of thy lord and pray for his forgiveness for he is oftreturning in grace and mercy.
perish the hands of the father of flame perish he
no profit to him from all his wealth and all his gains
burnt soon will he be in a fire of blazing flame
his wife shall carry the crackling wood  as fuel
a twisted rope of palmleaf fibre round her own neck
say he is allah the one and only
allah the eternal absolute
he begetteth not nor is he begotten
and there is none like unto him.
say i seek refuge with the lord of the dawn
from the mischief of created things
from the mischief of darkness as it overspreads
from the mischief of those who practise secret arts
and from the mischief of the envious one as he practises envy.
say i seek refuge with the lord and cherisher of mankind
the king or ruler of mankind
the god or judge of mankind
from the mischief of the whisperer of evil who withdraws after his whisper
the same who whispers into the hearts of mankind
among jinns and among men.
